Total pages: 579

--- Page 1 ---
“Millions have experienced the ideas of Werner Erhard, one of the most incisive 
and insightful thinkers of our generation. This book gives two additional and rare 
opportunities: to read the text of a Forum led by Erhard, and in parallel, to walk with  
a guide to the synergies between Erhard and the thinking of Martin Heidegger. ”
— David Eagleman, PhD, neuroscientist at Stanford University,  
New York Times bestselling author
SPEAKING BEING
WERNER ERHARD , MARTIN HEIDEGGER,   
AND A NEW POSSIBILITY OF BEING HUMAN
BRUCE HYDE AND DREW KOPP
AFTERWORD BY MICHAEL E. ZIMMERMAN
--- Page 2 ---

--- Page 3 ---
SPEAKIN G BEIN G
--- Page 4 ---

--- Page 5 ---
SPEAKING BEING
WERNER ERHARD ,  MARTIN HEIDEGGER ,  
AND A NEW POSSIBILITY OF BEING HUMAN
BR UC E HYDE AND DREW K O P P
AFTERWORD BY MICHAEL E. ZIMMERMAN  
--- Page 6 ---
Cover design: Tom Greensfelder
Cover image: © Ralf Hiemisch/Getty Images
Copyright © 2019 by Drew Kopp and Bruce Hyde. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyri ght Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization throu gh payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyri ght Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750–8400, fax (978) 646–8600, or on the Web at www.copyri ght.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed 
to the Permissions Department, John Wile y & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748–6011, fax (201) 748–6008, or online at www.wile y.
com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best eff  orts in preparin g this book, they make no representations 
or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifi cally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or 
fi tness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any 
loss of profi  t or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at
(800) 762–2974, outside the United States at (317) 572–3993, or fax (317) 572–4002.
Wiley publishes in a variet y of print and electronic formats and b y print-on-demand. Some material included with standard print versions of this book ma y 
not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may 
download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Kopp, Drew, author. | Hyde, Bruce, author. | Zimmerman, Michael E.,
   1946- author of afterword.  
Title: Speaking being : Werner Erhard, Martin Heidegger, and a new 
   possibility of being human / Drew Kopp and Bruce Hyde ; afterword by 
   Michael E. Zimmerman.  
Description: Hoboken, New Jersey : Wiley, [2019] | Includes bibliographical 
   references and index. 
Identifi  ers: LCCN 2019020014 (print) | LCCN 2019980338 (ebook) | ISBN 
   9781119549901 (paperback) | ISBN 9781119670049 (epub) | ISBN 
   9781119550211 (pdf)  
Subjects: LCSH: Erhard, Werner, 1936- | Heidegger, Martin,
   1889-1976—Infl  uence. | Werner Erhard and Associates. Forum (1989 : San
   Francisco, Calif.) | Ontology. | Rhetoric—Philosophy. |
   Self-actualization (Psychology) 
Classifi  cation: LCC BD331 .K6484 2019  (print) | LCC BD331  (ebook) | DDC
   111—dc2 3 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019020014
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019980338
SPEAKING BEING: Werner Erhard, Martin Heidegger, and a New Possibility of Being Human, written by Dr. Bruce Hyde and Dr. Drew Kopp, includes material 
and ideas originally developed by Werner Erhard and owned by Landmark Worldwide, such material and ideas which the authors have juxtaposed with the 
thinking of Martin Heidegger in an eff ort to illuminate both thinkers. The views and arguments expressed in this book in reference to the material and ideas are 
the sole responsibility of the authors and were not written by, nor are they endorsed by, Landmark, its affi  liates, or its predecessors.
LANDMARK and LANDMARK WORLDWIDE are re gistered trademarks of Landmark Worldwide LLC (“Landmark”). The 1989 Forum, The Landmark 
Forum, and other programs presented by Landmark, its affi  liates, and its predecessors are proprietary to Landmark and protected by international intellectual
property laws. Materials and quotations from such courses in this book are the copyri ght of Landmark, are used with permission, and may not be reproduced
without the prior written permission of Landmark.
Landmark wishes to make the materials, concepts, and information that constitute its programs, as well as the way in which these are assembled and presented,
available to academics for examination, study, research, and comment. As such, academics are invited to quote from the Landmark material, with attribution 
to Landmark, and are not required to have Landmark’s prior written permission to do so
Printed in the United States of America
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1
--- Page 7 ---
To the students in my Communication Studies classes at St. Cloud State University, who for the past twenty-five years have been 
my partners in the play and mystery of ontolo gical inquiry; and to my wife Susan Saetre, my constant guardian angel.
BRUCE
To my friend and writing partner, Bruce Hyde (1941-2015), who blazed a trail with his unrelenting commitment to communicate 
the unsaid. What a gift  to have worked with a man o f such brilliance, humor, and courage, even unto death, and with this book,
Bruce will continue to speak to each reader willing to take up the call to enter the conversation this book is but a fragment of.
I also dedicate this book to my students, ever my co-experimenters in the inquir y of what it means to be a writer and a reader; 
and to my wife Cindy, and my children, Tristan and Cassidy: I dedicate the fruits of my labor to your future.
DREW
--- Page 8 ---

--- Page 9 ---
Contents vii
CO NTENT S
ABOUT THE AUTHORS ix
INTRODUCTIO N  1
Day One: Session One 7
Talking about Being  8
Dasein  12
Two Theses  14
Ontological Dialogue  16
Being-in-the-World: Being-in 20
Mood 24
Interval: Hints: Ontological Distinctions 32
Day One: Session Two 34
Philosophy as Rhetorical Evocation  35
Getting It and Losing It  4 4
Authenticity  54
Interval: Dasein: Meaning an d Mineness  58
Day One: Session Three 60
Interval: Yankelovich Study Results  62
Day One: Session Four 68
Concern 73
Already Always Listening  75
Interval: Jargon 78
Day One: Session Five 80
End of Day One Interval: Refl exion: The Cartesian Defi ciency  86
Day Two: Session One 89
Being-in-the-World: Being-With 92
Giving and Refl exion  103
The They-Self 107
Interval: Hermeneutic Phenomenology  116
Day Two: Session Two 120
Thinking  1 21
Heidegger’s Pedagogy 127
Solicitude of a Forum Leader  132
Interval: The Forgetting of Being, Part One of Eight: 
Getting and Losing 136
Day Two: Session Three 138
Social Moods 156
Thrownness 159
Day Two: Session Four 166
End of Day Two Interval: The For getting of Being, Part Two of Eight:
Questioning  168
Day Three: Session One 171
In-Order-To  172
Awakening Attunements 185
Interval: The Forgetting of Being, Part Three of Ei ght: Heidegger’s Etymologies  196
Day Three: Session Two 198
Danger: Attunements and Moods  200
Interval: The Forgetting of Being, Part Four of Eight: The Pre-Socratics 208
Day Three: Session Three 212
Choice   217
The Violence of Meaning  226
The Same 237
God  259 
Interval: The Forgetting of Being, Part Five of Ei ght: Physis  26 4
Day Three: Session Four 268
Waiting for the Leap  284
A Violent Way 292
End of Day Three Interval:  The Forgetting of Being, Part Six o f Eight: Saying Nothing  308
Day Four: Session One 311
Being-in-the-World: World  312
The Uncanny 319
The Call of Conscience  332
What is Said When Conscience Calls? 342
Nothing: Beyond Nihilism 358
Interval : The Forgetting of Being, Part Seven of Eight: Logos  372
Day Four: Session Two 376
The Three Levels o f Truth  377
Primordial Metaphor: Clearing  397
The Drift 409
“Way of Being” and the “Nature o f Being for Human Beings” 418
Interval: The Forgetting of Being, Part Eight o f Eight: The Heart o f the Matter 448
Day Four: Session Three 450
A Substance Ontology  472
Event Ontology 479
Technology 484 
Techne 492
Enframing  499
The Oblivion of Oblivion  510
Transformation as Technology  519
End of Day Four Interval:  Technology of Transformation 530
A FTERW O RD BY MI C HAEL E. ZIMMERMAN 5 32  
R EFEREN C E S  54 3
INDEX  547
--- Page 10 ---

--- Page 11 ---
About the Authors ix
AB O UT THE AUTH O R S
BRUCE HYD E  (PhD, University of Southern California, 1990) was a Professor of 
Communication Studies at St. Cloud State University until his death on October 
13th, 2015 (1941-2015). His primary interests as an educator were with the 
ontological dimensions of language and communication, and with dialogue as a
non-polarized and non-polarizing form of public discourse
.
D REW K O P P  (PhD, University of Arizona, 2009) is an Associate Professor o f 
Writing Arts at Rowan University. His research interests focus on the theory and
history of rhetorical pedagogies, and he has published articles in journals in the
field of rhetoric and writing studies, including Rhetoric Review (2013), andw JAC:
Rhetoric, Writing, Culture, Politics (2012). He has also contributed a chapter to the
edited collection Disrupting Pedagogies in the Knowledge Society  (2011).y
--- Page 12 ---
x Praise fo r Speaking Being
From the Aft erword :
I regard Speaking Being as an enormously important contri bution to understanding 
Heidegger and Erhard. The latter has received far too little serious academic 
attention, and this book begins to make up for that lack. Moreover, the book’s 
analysis of Heidegger’s thought is among the best that I have ever read. I commend
this book to all readers without reservation.
MICHAEL E. ZIMMERMAN, Professor Emeritus, University of Colorado, Boulder
This book is powerful, imaginative, frustrating, amusing, threatening, and 
enlightening—all at the same time. It also has the power to transform your life .
JONATHAN D. MORENO, University of Pennsylvania Professor of Ethics, 
author of Impromptu Man
The profound impact of Werner Erhard’s work on culture and society is a
manifestation of an incredible insight, the experience o f being, presented in 
this book through a comparative analysis o f a transcript of a 1989 Forum led by 
Erhard alongside Heidegger’s reflections on the meaning of “being there.” The
authors have drawn amazing parallels between these two extraordinary thinkers 
and have demonstrated the intersections of Heide
gger’s language with Erhard’s 
ontological rhetoric of transformation. Erhard has at times described aspects of his 
method as ruthless compassion, and like all forms of compassion, evident here is a
fundamental motivating desire to alleviate the suff erin g of others. 
JAMES R. DOTY, MD, Founder and Director, The Center for Compassion and Altruism
Research and Education, Professor of Neurosurgery, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, and Senior Editor of  The Oxford Handbook of Compassion Science
Speaking Being is not a book. It is a multimodal tour de force of ontological rhetoric
that hails its reader into an event and in so doing per forms as an event, rathe r 
than what is commonly rendered as a book between two covers. Its status as an 
event is performed on every pa ge wherein the “showing” of Being is enacted via 
its remarkable design. Kaleidoscopically, Bruce Hyde and Drew Kopp have drawn 
their readers into a dazzling display, where the participants in dialogue with Werner 
Erhard in a specific Forum in 1989 are put into dialogue with Martin Heidegger. The 
result is arguably one of the most astounding academic interventions into both 
Erhard’s methodology and Heideggerian thought. Citing David Farrell Krell, Hyde 
and Kopp remind us that “to be on a woodpath means to be in a cul-de-sac, a path
that leads nowhere and has no exit.” Speaking Being puts its readers in a dizzying 
cul-de-sac within which they may never leave, but rather transform into one of the
glittering particles of this rhetorical kaleidoscope. 
CYNTHIA HAYNES, Professor of English, Clemson University, author of  The Homesick 
Phone Book: Addressin g Rhetoric in the Age of Perpetual Conflic t
Theory and Practice: Ways o f seeing what one claims to be the truth o f some
intended object of consciousness and ways of applyin g this truth to one’s 
everyday existence in order to cultivate wisdom, goodness, self-realization, and 
justice. The dialogical teachings of Werner Erhard speak to the importance of this 
relationship and its ontological significance. Professors Hyde and Kopp, scholars 
of rhetoric and communication who had observed and participated in pro grams 
designed by Erhard, provide comprehensive and detailed conversations—what 
they term “ontological rhetoric”—that took place in Erhard’s 1989 Forum, and they 
demonstrate how Erhard and Heide gger can be read together for the benefit o f 
both. This book is a major achievement in the scholarship of Erhard and Heidegge r 
studies. A much-needed moment of enli ghtenment.
MICHAEL J. HYDE, University Distinguished Professor of Communication Ethics, Wake 
Forest University, author of Perfection: Comin g to Terms with Being Human
In Speaking Being the reader discovers two original thinkers—Werner Er hard 
and Martin Heidegger—two intellects who independently reached lin guistic, 
ontological, and phenomenological philosophies that illuminate each other. 
PRAI S E F O R SPEAKING BEING: WERNER ERHARD, MARTIN HEIDEGGER,  
AND A NEW POSSIBILITY OF BEING HUMAN
--- Page 13 ---
 Praise for Speaking Being xi
Authors Hyde and Kopp accomplish the formidable task of masterfully presenting 
Erhard and Heidegger side by side in a readable, lively, and illuminating text. There 
is nothing quite like it!
JERONIMA (JERI) ECHEVERRI A, Professor of History and Provost Emerita, California 
State University at Fresno, former Executive Vice-Chancellor for Academic Aff airs o f 
the California State University System
Educational research confirms that without a significant intervention, students 
who become teachers are likely to replicate the pedagogical approaches their 
teachers used with them. Practicing Erhard’s approach to ontological inquiry
—
presented in print for the first time in this book— provides such an intervention. 
It equips students, teachers, academics o f any field to critically examine their 
dispositions and access more e ff ective ways o f being and acting. Speaking Being is
a must read for scholars of social foundations of education, teacher education, and
frankly, for members of any field of study.
CAROLYNE J. WHITE, Professor of Social Foundations, De partment of Urban 
Education, Rutgers University Newark
A diff erent you and a di ff erent me must show up each day i f we are going to
tackle the world’s most vexing problems. This book talks us through a process of 
transformation by showing us what it means to be an authentic human being in an
inauthentic world, and what it means to take a stand 
for a world where ever yone
matters and where ever yone can make a diff erence. 
WILEY “CHIP ” SOUBA, MD, SCD, MBA, Professor of Surgery, Geisel School 
of Medicine at Dartmouth, former Dean of Medicine and VP for Health Aff airs,
Dartmouth College
This engaging study of Erhard’s counter-discursive approach to transformational 
education—and how this approach aligns significantly with Heidegger’s thinking
—
might serve as a starting point for a deeper Indigenous philosophy. Rooted in a
more non-hierarchical epistemology, such an Indigenous philosophy promises to
move us away from a colonized and deeply problematized way of thinking, toward 
embracing the power and mysteriousness o f presence, and making possible a
place-based, non-anthropocentric interconnecte dness. This is the next essentia l 
step we must take if we are to survive as a s pecies.
FOUR ARROWS, AKA DON TRENT JACOBS, PHD, EdD, editor of Unlearning the
Language of Conquest, author of Point of Departuref and Teaching Trulyd
While some readers of Speaking Being may be familiar with The Landmark Forum, 
most don’t know its connections to the philosophical tradition. Hyde and Kopp 
have woven together concise explanations o f Heidegger’s notoriously diff icult 
thinking with an actual transcript o f Erhard’s Forum—by turns moving, funny, and 
shocking. This juxtaposition draws the reader into the experience and power fully
illuminates the teachings of these two thinkers.
DAVID STOREY, Associate Professor, Boston College, author of 
Naturalizing Heidegger
Speaking Being presents an ontological play between Erhard, Heidegger, the 
participants of a Forum delivered in 1989, and the reader, who is summoned to 
the scene to dwell in compelling questions and distinctions, the living of which
make available the invention of a life that is experienced as authentic. The
relentless commitment of authors H yde and Kopp to communicate the unsayable, 
Being, opens up new directions for a rhetoric of emancipation that goes beyond 
traditional critical theories. Speaking Being speaks a new relation to language, one
that honors the unexplored ontolo gical power of language to create a new freedom 
to be, to live with existential courage.
MARGARIDA GARCIA , Vice-Dean, Research and Communications, Facult y of Law 
(Civil Law) and Professor, Faculty of Law (Civil Law) and Faculty of Social Sciences,
University of Ottawa
--- Page 14 ---
Many academics in cultural studies accept postmodernity and content pedagogy 
as unquestionable facts of the world, but with a paltry understanding of how these 
ideas undermine our intention to produce morally conscious, action-oriented 
citizens. In their lucid exposition of Werner Erhard’s methodology, Hyde and Kopp 
off er a cogent roadmap out of such a paralyzing paradigm of knowledge and 
subjectivity. Brilliantly, the authors use Martin Heidegger’s writing to illuminate
Erhard’s work and The Forum’s compelling impact on participants. Readers will
discover for themselves, based on the contexts they bring, a powerful pedagogy
of transformation grounded in an ontological inquiry into human being that 
leads students to discover their own paths of social agency and initiative. Highly 
r
ecommended!
TRYSTAN T. COTTEN, Associate Professor, Gender Studies, Universit y of California,
Stanislaus, founder and managing editor of Transgress Press
Speaking Being presents, perhaps for the first time, a com plete transcript of an 
actual Forum led by Werner Erhard, allowing the reader to directly observe and 
experience the unique power of dialogue as a tool for human transformation. 
Furthermore, authors Hyde and Kopp provide an intellectually satisfying
correlation between the philosophical ideas of Martin Heidegger and the out-here-
in-the-world work of Werner Erhard, revealing their surprising complementarity. Id
congratulate the authors on achieving this tour de force.
MICHAEL LESLIE , Associate Professor, Journalism and Communications,
University of Florida
xii Praise fo r Speaking Being
--- Page 15 ---
 In troduction 1
 Introduction
In 1971, the television debut o f All in the Family tickled an American public whoy
was also celebrating the successful moon landing, and safe return home, of two
Apollo space missions. In the same year, much smaller audiences took note of Igor 
Stravinsky’s death and the birth of Calvin Broadus Jr. (aka Snoop Dogg/Lion); a 
marketing phenomenon was born in Seattle with the opening of the first Star
-
bucks; Idi Amin ousted Milton Obote to become the dictator of Uganda; and in the
new academic field of com
position and rhetoric, a movement to elevate the status 
of process began to stir. Meanwhile, in October of that year in a meeting room o f 
San Francisco’s less-than-swank Jack Tar Hotel, Werner Erhard assembled some
two hundred 
participants for the debut of the est Training. Given this timing fo r 
the emergence of the est Training, media at the time characterized it as a part of t
the human potential movement, but scholar Jonathan Moreno has more recently 
called es
t “the most im portant cultural event a fter the human potential movement
itself seemed exhausted” (Im promptu Man 247).
Infamous for its ri gorous ground rules and confrontational methods—
elements Erhard says were necessary in the liberated, let-it-all-hang-out, “new 
a
ge” ethos o f the time—the est Training (Latin for t it is, and an acronym for Erhard 
Seminars Training) grew in popularity throu ghout the 1970s because of the im-
pressive bene fits participants reported having received, including better relation -
ships and a greater sense of “aliveness. ” Trainees experienced being “at cause” 
in the matter o f their lives, and having a new sense that their lives could make a
difference in the world. The y felt “free to be. ” This new sense of responsibilit y and 
freedom allowed for breakthrou ghs in communicatin g with others, and enabled
them to produce results, both personal and pro fessional, that they would previ-
ously have seen as unlikely.
At the source of this educational enterprise was an experience Erhard had 
undergone earlier that year, although he later said it was “not in itself so much an 
experience, as a shift in the context in which he held all process, including experi-
ence” (Bartley 168). In some traditions, such an event might be referred to as an
individual’s having undergone enlightenment; Erhard has called it a transformation.
He was, at this point in his life, a highly successful sales manager and trainer for a 
large publishing company. Further, he had devoted much of the previous decade to 
the rigorous exploration of various systems of enlightenment and personal devel-
opment, from Zen (the essential one, he says) to the Dale Carnegie course and Mind
Dynamics. But one morning in 1971, as he was driving across the Golden Gate Bridge
en route to his office, he suddenly realized that he knew nothing. As he related the
incident to his biographer, William Bartley:
All the things I had ever heard, and read, and all those hours 
of practice, suddenly fell into place. It was so stupidly,
blindingly simple that I could not believe it. I saw that there
were no hidden meanings, that everything was just the 
way that it is, and that I was already all ri
ght. . . . I realized 
that I was not my emotions or thoughts. I was not my 
ideas, my intellect, my perceptions, my beliefs. . . . I was 
simply the space, the creator, the source of all that stuff. I
experienced Self as Self in a direct , unmediated way. I didn’t 
just experience Self; I became Self. Suddenly I held all the 
information, the content, in my life in a new way, from a new
mode, a new context. . . .  I am I am. (Bartley 167–168)
In other words, an experience of being. The insight Erhard derived from that ex-
perience subsequently became what thousands of est trainees would spend two t
weekends and several hundred dollars to “get” for themselves. 
Discussing his work later, Erhard addressed the challenge he had confronted in
attempting to communicate what seemed essentially incommunicable: “You can’t
do this in the ordinary sense of communication: I can’t have it and give it to you. But
I can communicate in a way so that you get an opportunity to realize that you have 
it yourself already. Essentially, this is what the est Training was developed to do. Itt
provides a setting in which this kind of sharing takes place” (Bartley 169).
From the outset, the language of est was central to both its pedagogical process 
and its public image. A fundamental tenet of the est Training, as well as its succes-t
sor program, The Forum, has been that transformation lives in language, and that 
participants keep the program’s results available in their lives by communicating 
those results with others. At the same time, Erhard’s enterprise has consistently 
eschewed traditional advertising. The only way people have become aware of his 
work has been through hearing about it from their friends, family, or associates. 
The resulting symbiotic relationship—the pro gram survives only when participants 
communicate about it with family and friends, and it is through communicating
about it that participants keep the benefits alive in their experience—has served the 
work well through four decades. By 1985, when the est Training was discontinuedt
and replaced by The Forum, word-of-mouth had brought a half-million people to see
for themselves what this transformation was all about. As of 2019, another 2 million
“
--- Page 16 ---
2 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
people have graduated from The Forum, either the four-day Forum of Erhard’s time 
through 1991, or the current iteration of the course, the three-day Landmark
Forum (www.landmarkworldwide.com).
1
Erhard’s influence on the culture has made itself felt in another way as well. 
During the 1970s, when it sometimes seemed that every fifth person in San Francis-
co was an
est graduate, you could generally detect that element of the populationt
by their use of the program’s language, which in casual use began to be heard as
jargon. Erhard’s use of this terminology, however, was highly purposive, and many
of those words and phrases made their way into the public sphere, some to last
-
ing effect. An example has been the shift in the popular understanding of the term 
sharing. B
efore est, people shared a cookie or a bench in the park; what was shared
was divided, and in the process one’s own share was inevitably diminished. But
in the est Training, gg participants shared their experience, and through sharing, that 
experience was augmented. To share, in the world of est, was to communicate in
such a way that one’sself and not merely one’s story was made available, leaving the f
other touched rather than merely informed. This meaning of the word, we assert, is 
now common in our culture. Likewise, the term coaching, borrowed by Erhard from
the sports arena in the early eighties to identify the style of his pedagogy, has since
become ubiquitous in the field of management, human resources, and executive 
coaching. And the ubiquitous Mastercard catchphrase, “Master the possibilities, ”
was born in the mind o
f an est graduate for whom the term t possibility had acquired
a new level of meaning; however, through overuse in the media, this new level of 
meaning has diminished.
The move to discontinue the Training in 1985 and replace it with The Forum 
arose from Erhard’s perception of a shift in the culture’s way of responding to the 
Training; he wanted to design a course that was responsive to that shift. At this 
point, while Erhard’s success during those years had been greeted by considerable 
media curiosity, scholarly interest was moderate. Several studies of the est Trainingt
attempted to measure its effects using a psychological model; while he considered
such efforts valuable, Erhard has asserted that this approach is inappropriate for 
analysis of his work. His work, he says, is not psychological but ontological: his 
concern is the being of human beings (“Heart of the Matter” 1984). He has also 
consistently emphasized that the focus of his work is the development of the lan-
guage in which it is articulated. Yet no significant scholarly work dealing either with
Erhard’s language use, or with the nature of an ontological methodology, has been 
published, even in the academic fields most likely to be deeply concerned with
such matters—rhetoric and writing studies, business management, philosophy, and 
communication studies. This book aims to begin to correct that omission.
Before proceeding, we offer this statement of authorial stance: The authors
have engaged extensively, both as participants and as scholars, in numerous pro-
grams designed by Werner Erhard. The senior author took the est Training for thet
first time in 1973, and we have each participated a number of times in The Forum, 
both during Erhard’s tenure in the organization and following his departure. Our 
doctoral dissertations (University of Southern California, 1990; University of Arizona,
2008) consisted of rhetorical and philosophical analyses of The Forum. Based upon
this considerable study and experience, our assessment of Erhard’s work is un-
equivocal: we have found this work to be pedagogically effective and intellectually 
significant in all of its historical iterations. Our intention in this book is to stimulate
its serious consideration by the academic community, as well as by others in the
culture at large.
It is also important to note that our approach as participant observers has
its limits. To carry out the design of the book, we have precluded a number of 
approaches that readers may wish to see addressed, and we beg those readers to 
indulge us. Before any significant and critical treatments could be viable, or even 
possible, from a number of disciplines—including philosophy, communication stud-
ies, rhetorical criticism, and so on—the phenomenon must be first made available. 
We present this book as a way into the phenomenon in question, and consequently,
we invite members from a range of academic disciplines to enter the conversation
we are seeking to initiate.
Evolution 
This is an historical document. It presents an account of one moment—albeit a sig -
nificant one—in an on going project for the development of human being. The first 
iteration of this project, the est Training, was designed to communicate to peoplet
living in the cultural environment of the 1970s. As Erhard saw it, considerable logis-
tical rigor was required for the course to achieve its purpose, and thus the format
included demands for which est soon became notorious, including lengthy sessions t
1 Landmark describes The Landmark Forum as a personal and professional development program,
based on the discipline of applied ontology and phenomenology. Erhard created the work in the
early 1970s and continued its development until in 1991 Landmark took over its ongoing devel-
opment as expressed in The Landmark Forum and other Landmark programs. As of the writing of 
this book, the material and structure of The Forum have continued to be developed during three 
decades since the 1989 Forum presented in this book. The Landmark Forum of today (circa 2019) 
is less time (three days and an evening and each day ends by 10:00 pm), it incorporates the use of 
PowerPoint displays and videos that enhance the participants’ experience of and access to what is
being presented, and there is no use of profanity on the part of the program leaders.
--- Page 17 ---
 Introduction 3
with limited bathroom breaks, a highly confrontational interaction style—with
the use of expletives—and the surrender of all wristwatches at the door. These
demands were modified when The Forum replaced the Training; and in subsequent 
years, as the communication paradigm of the culture has continued to shift, the 
delivery of The Forum has altered accordingly.
On the one hand, of course, The Forum conversation inevitably challenges 
participants’ familiar way of seeing things. Ontological inquiry—pedagogy such as 
The Forum, that aims to get beyond mere conceptual knowledge—is of necessity 
rigorous and sometimes uncomfortable. In Martin Heidegger’s words, authentic in
-
quiry into Being always “has the character of doing violence, whether to the claims 
of the everyday interpretation, or to its complacency and tranquillized obviousness”
(BT 359). But while the conversation in the current Landmark Forum remains rigor-T
ous, participants will find a presentation that can for the most part be described as 
gentler, and more user-friendly, than the one presented in this book. 
A further aspect of this difference, of course, has to do with Werner Erhard’s
personal style. In his delivery of both the Training and The Forum, Erhard’s com-
munication was edgily playful and relentlessly purposive. He called his approach
ruthless compassion; and it included a profound sense of humor and Socratic 
irony implicit in the human condition. To communicate the humor as well as the 
compassion, he o
ften provoked and insulted participants, using language gener-
ally considered inappropriate for such a setting (in a parody of one of his favorite 
epithets, graduates of the Training were sometimes referred to as “estholes”). Yet, as 
this book shows, those participants who initially resisted these intrusions inevitably
got the message. Erhard has related this confrontive aspect of his communication
to his 1971 experience of transformation: “On the bridge, ” he said, “all of a sudden I 
could be 100% responsible for everything in my life, and at the same time none of it 
had any significance. At that point you are free and fearless” (Erhard, interview with 
authors). Erhard’s communication style, and his humor, remain on full display in this 
book; the authors see them as important and entertaining aspects of the historical 
account we are presenting here.
Erhard Encounters Heidegger
Despite the shift we have cited here in The Forum’s style and tone, a central thesis
of this book is that from the first offering of the est Training in 1971, through its t
replacement by the Forum in 1985 and its current iteration as the Landmark Forum, 
the process at the heart of this pedagogy has retained its transformational
dynamic. This dynamic, as we will show, arises in the unspoken ontological realm
of The Forum conversation as it proceeds, and has been the essential element of the 
course through all of its terminological variations. 
During the transition to The Forum, Erhard excised many of the est Training’s t
more meditative exercises and incorporated into the course a new vocabulary and
redesigned procedures, with the stated intention that participants would have an 
enhanced experience of creating a new realm of possibility for themselves and their y
lives. At about this time, through colleagues, he was introduced to the work of the
twentieth-century German philosopher Martin Heidegger. Erhard was taken with the 
way Heidegger’s thinking reverberated with his own, and he consulted with several 
Heideggerian scholars on the subject. Two of them—Hubert Dreyfus of University of 
California, Berkeley and Michael E. Zimmerman of Tulane—provided formal assess-
ments of the est Training’s effectiveness, and noted its consistencies with elements t
of Heidegger’s thought. When Erhard’s revised technology emerged in The Forum
and other redesigned courses, significant Heideggerian terminology was included 
in its rhetorical mix, and Erhard occasionally read passages from Heidegger in his
presentations.
Most significantly, Erhard saw that Heidegger’s ideas and his own were commu-
nicating from the same unspoken realm, and that the specifications of the two vo-
cabularies could be merged to communicate that realm more powerfully: “I learned
from Heidegger, ” said Erhard, “nuances of what I had been saying that clarified and
made more potent what was there” (Erhard, interview with authors). 
What was there was Erhard’s technology of language for the communication of 
being, and its ability, in both the Training and The Forum, to consistently and pow-
erfully evoke an experience that participants found transformative. The evocation
of that experience has remained The Forum’s essential element; Erhard’s encounter 
with Heidegger enriched the vocabulary in which he could see into it more pro-
foundly and communicate it more effectively. 
Technology
The form of this study will be comparative analysis: we will demonstrate that the 
work of Werner Erhard is aligned in significant ways with the philosophy of Martin
Heidegger, and that a comparison of their work illuminates the thinking of both
men. We will show that The Forum’s dialogic form introduces a performative dimen-
sion of Heidegger’s ontological vocabulary in a way that Heidegger himself, working 
within a restrictive academic and political culture, was unable to do. We propose 
that The Forum conversation is ontological rhetoric: purposive speaking that com-
municates and makes present a context of meaning that, if left unexamined, shapes 
--- Page 18 ---
4 SPEAKING BEING
thesis is that the work of Werner Erhard makes available the ontological domain of 
language, so that the decentering of subjectivity and the reinvention of the self can
be experienced as possibilities rather than merely considered as theory. 
We recognize that this pedagogical model is in many ways a radical one, given
the strength of the assumptions embedded in our tradition; but Heidegger says that 
an experience with language in the ontological domain always requires “a leap.” 
As our educational institutions struggle increasingly to generate an opening for the
human in the face of the advance of the technological, we argue that the situation is
critical, and that a lea
p of this kind is in order.
The Plan of the Book
The central text for this book, located in the left and right columns on either page, 
is the combination of two sources: notes taken by the senior author while observing
a Forum in San Francisco led by Werner Erhard in December 1989, and a transcrip-
tion of the video of the same four-day event made available to the junior author on 
location at Landmark Worldwide’s archives. While the transcript provides compre-
hensive and detailed conversations of the actual 1989 Forum, there are important
alterations that must be accounted for. First and foremost, all names have been 
altered except for Werner Erhard, and actual names have been used only for those 
participants who speak more than once or twice with Erhard or the other two indi-
viduals leading the course (“Kipp” and “Wes”). In addition, some conversations have 
been edited out, or summarized, for the sake of space. For instance, all discussions 
dealing with the Six-Day Course, discontinued in 1990, have been removed. Also
missing from the transcript is the Evening Session of the 1989 Forum: there was 
no extant video recording of that event. However, that omission can be rectified 
for interested readers if they were to attend an evening session of The Landmark
Forum, where participants will share their experience of the course for guests they
themselves have invited.
We call the text that accompanies the transcript either “sidebars” or “intervals. ” 
Sidebars occur in the central columns between the far left and right panes that 
house the transcript of The Forum, and the intervals occur between sessions of the
course, and at the conclusion of each of the four days. In the sidebars and intervals 
are relevant ideas from the thinking of Martin Heidegger. Sometimes the connection 
between a sidebar and the transcript it accompanies may be apparent; sometimes 
it may be intended obliquely, as a hint at the background. Intervals are more often
oblique in this way due to the focus on Heidegger’s thinking in its wider arcs, for 
and limits our way of being. However, this context of meaning cannot be spoken
directl
y. It becomes present by virtue of what is said.
The dynamic of Erhard’s technology of language responds directly to issues 
raised by Heidegger in his 1954 essay, “The Question Concerning Technology” (Basic 
Writings). Technology’s essence, proposes Heidegger, is its relentless demand that
all of nature, including human beings, be placed in standing reserve, on call for the
uses of technology itself.  The way of being evoked by this development (i.e., that we 
ourselves function as “calculable material” in a cybernetic system designed to serve 
ourselves) poses the danger that we may become lost in the profound reflexivity o
f 
that system, and, most fatally, may forget that anything has been lost. Surrender to 
technology “threatens man with the possibility that it could be denied to him to en
-
ter into a more original revealing and hence to experience the call of a more primal 
truth” 
(“QCT” in BW 333). Such surrender, however, seems inevitable: the technolog-W
ical epoch is where we have landed, the only way of being we have been provided, 
and resistance is as futile as surrender is fatal. 
But Heidegger suggests a middle path, a “comportment toward technology
which expresses ‘yes’ and at the same time ‘no’” (DT 54). Further, he proposes that T
“essential reflection upon technology and decisive confrontation with it must hap-
pen in a realm that is, on the one hand, akin to the essence of technology, and, on 
the other, fundamentally different from it” (“QCT” in BW 340). We suggest that Wer-W
ner Erhard’s work provides such a realm. It is both a manifestation of the technolog-
ical epoch and a subversive appropriation of its impulse, a thinking which reaches
beyond the technological paradigm by reaching through that paradigm.
In Academia
 For half a century, postmodern and poststructuralist theories across many disci-
plines have theorized a new freedom from the constraints of the Cartesian model
of human being. Human subjectivity has been decentered; the self is no longer 
understood as the fixed and self-certain cogito but is open to creative reinvention;
language does not merely re-present a preexisting world of objective meanings, but
in fact generates the meanings that constitute that world. 
These theoretical assertions concern being. But their effective communication
in the universities has been hindered by our epistemologically-based academic
tradition, which assumes that the central dynamic of education is knowing. This has 
given rise to a pedagogical model in which the ontological domain must always re-
main merely conceptual, because being is not apprehended by knowing. The book’s
--- Page 19 ---
 Introduction 5
Burke, who, beyond their tireless support, have gathered together a generous read-
ing group. To the group, composed of Allan Cohen, Joe DiMaggio, Bruce Gregory, 
Michael C. Jensen, Sigurfreyr Jonasson, David C. Logan, Nicholas Merton, Daniel 
Rogerson, Steve Zaffron, and Michael E. Zimmerman—we want you to know our im-
measurable joy when we received feedback that could only come from the deepest
appreciation. For granting access to Landmark Worldwide’s archives to allow for the 
production of an accurate and complete transcript, we thank Harry Rosenberg, Mick
Leavitt and Landmark Worldwide staff. To the Wiley team, including Shannon Vargo,
Sally Baker, Peter Knox, Deborah Schindlar, and Jocelyn Kwiatkowski: thank you for 
taking a risk on this project—given its untraditional scope, design, and size—and
for taking such great care throughout all stages of bringing this book into the world.
To Lou Agosta, Jeff Bineham, Richard Doyle, Charles Guignon, Michael J. Hyde,
and Carolyne White—to gether with the members of Lecole book club—thank you
for reviewing and responding to the early versions of the manuscript; we hope your 
thoughtful attention presages serious study of this rich rhetorical phenomenon 
within such academic fields as rhetoric and writing studies, education, philosophy,
and communication studies.
Last, Bruce and I together stand in ovation to the man who has made, and will
continue to make, the difference for both of us and countless others—the di fference
for all those who have had the opportunity, the gift, to be and speak with him— for 
in the very act of speaking being we create possibility for ourselves and our lives. 
Werner Erhard: Thank you for providing a way to say what otherwise remains 
forever unsayable.
instance, the central theme of “the forgetting of Being, ” which has eight parts.
Our purpose in this book is not to explain The Forum, or Heidegger’s philosophy—
although there are moments where we do provide analysis—but rather, we primarily
aim to engage the reader in thinking Erhard’s and Heidegger’s ideas for themselves.
For readers who have previously participated in The Forum, we believe the con-
fluence here of Heidegger’s thinking with Erhard’s will enrich the way those readers
hold their Forum experience.  This has been true for the authors, and it is likewise
consistent with the experience of Werner Erhard, for whom exposure to Heidegger’s 
thinking provided profound insights (Erhard, interview with authors). We intend that 
this book, in a dialogue with its readers, will evoke such insights.  
Martin Heidegger once cautioned his students not to focus too closely on the
concepts in his lectures, but rather to follow the “movement of showing” 
(OTB 2).
The Forum conversation, we assert, is a carefully designed movement in language 
for the showing of being. In this book, we will show that showing. Our goal—Heide -
gger’s, Erhard’s, the authors’—is the unconcealment of a powerful aspect of human
being with which we are, for the most part, unfamiliar.
While it may go without saying, reading this book will not provide an experience
of The Forum. We intend to hint at that experience, and we encourage readers for 
whom our hints are provocative to seek out the experience for themselves. The Forum
occurs essentially as adialogue; ontological inquiry demands interactive play, and 
needs “the widest sphere in which to swing” (“DL” inOWL 27). In written form, Heideg-
ger warned, “the movement of the questioning that is called for here might too easily 
congeal” (“DL” in OWL 50). 
Nonetheless, as we undertake this project, the authors stand in the open ques-
tion: What is the possibility of communicating being? This is not a questioning that
seeks an answer; rather, the inquiry it generates persistently reflects the question 
itself back upon the questioner, undermining comforting and limiting assumptions.
Thus we see it as a transformational question. We invite the reader to join us in this 
inquiry.
Acknowledgments
It is impossible to list all those who have contributed significantly to the composi-
tion of this book; to do so with full integrity would mean naming all who have risked 
what it means to hear the unsaid in what is said. In particular, our gratitude goes
to several extraordinar
y individuals without whom our work would have failed to
move beyond the planning stages, including first, Barbara Stevenson and Sheryl
--- Page 20 ---

--- Page 21 ---
 Forum Da y One: Session One 7
 PRELUDE
More than 700 people were assembled in the ballroom of the Hyatt Re gency Hotel in San 
Francisco on the mornin g of December 2 7th, 1989. This was the first da y of The Forum, and the 
occasion was unique in several wa ys. The first was that this Forum was to be led b y Werner 
Erhard himself. Althou gh he had created the technolo gy of lan guage that constituted The
Forum, since 1973, to accommodate growin g demand for the pro gram across the United States 
and in Europe, the course had increasin gly been led by members o f a growin g body o f est
Trainers, and later Forum leaders, a group of men and women trained by Erhard. As of 1989 
there were fort y-three Forum leaders, ten women and thirt y-three men.
A second unique aspect of this four-day event was that it was an exceptionally lar ge Forum
composed of various groups in addition to the 502 re gular participants (the usual number
ranged from 100 to 250 ). Forty Forum leaders were also present as part of their trainin g; durin g 
breaks in the procedure, they met with Erhard for debriefin g sessions that the senior author 
attended as part o f a special pro gram for Forum graduates called Openin gs, a group of approx-
imately 100 participants w ho were permitte d to observe wit hout active ly participatin g. Also 
in the room were a number of invited observers who occupied a visitors’ gallery and whose
number varied durin g the course of The Forum. Last, a lar ge contin gent of staff and assistants
(volunteers) performed lo gistical duties throu ghout the four days. 
Due to the efforts of the assistants, the ballroom set-u p remained consistent across all 
sessions of each of the four days. Re gular participants and Forum leaders were seated in rows,
theater-st yle, before a raised platform which stretched across most of the width of the room, 
and included a runway section extendin g well into the center o f the audience area. Arran ged
on the platform were three chalkboards, two bar-hei ght director’s chairs, a music stand, and
a large table which held a water pitc her and glasses, tissues, an d writin g materia ls. Openin gs 
partici pants and other observers were seated on risers at the rear o f the room. Also at the rear
of the room was an enclosed translators’ booth: amon g the participants in Openin gs were 
twent y-five observers from Japan, seminar leaders and staff members in the Tok yo office of 
Werner Erhard and Associates. They listened to the proceedin gs in simultaneous translation 
throu gh earphones connected to the translators’ booth. Finally, three television cameras were
placed strate gically around the room to record the event, and several television monitors were 
placed so that most participants could watch the proceedin gs on video if they chose.
THE FORUM BEGINS
At 9:00 am, unannounced, Werner Erhard walked onto the platform. His manner was relaxed 
and casua l. He wore dark tan s lacks, a w hite shirt o pen at t he collar, and an olive sweater 
vest. He greeted the participants in a friendly way, welcomed guests, and asked for questions 
while late arrivals were completin g their paperwork. He asked i f there was anythin g about the
television cameras that needed clearin g up, and he explained the presence of the Openin gs
participants and the observers seated in the Gallery. Someone asked about the people wearin g
earphones, and he explained about the translators and participants from Japan. “That’s a good 
question,” he said. “Questions like that . . . what about, what if?”
Participants who raised their hands were asked to stand and wait until they were given a 
microphone; an assistant was stationed on each aisle to deliver one. After Erhard res ponded 
S PEAKIN G 
BEIN G
DA Y ONE
F O R U M DA Y O NE : 
SESSION ONE
--- Page 22 ---
8 S PEAKIN G BEIN G
Talking about Being
One of the similarities between the work of Werner Erhard and
Martin Heidegger is that both are designing a language for a 
specific purpose: the evocation o f Being. Since the debut of The 
Forum in 1985, Erhard has regularly incorporated Heideggerian 
terminology into his vocabulary, and has quoted Heidegger 
extensively in his courses. It is the primary thesis o f this book that 
Erhard’s work is aligned in significant ways with the philosophy of 
Martin Heidegger. Even the est Training, the beginnings of whicht
predate Erhard’s encounter with Heidegger (circa 1980), already
was aligned in significant ways with Heidegger’s thinking. This
alignment allowed Erhard to creatively incorporate Heide ggerian
language in the delivery of what would become The Forum .
Heidegger’s language, on first encounter, is notoriously 
difficult; he regularly invented new German terms for his ideas,
and translators have struggled to capture his meanings. Erhard
likewise uses words in unconventional ways, and calls his work
a “technology of language” in recognition of that fact. It is the
experience of the authors that a comparative inquiry into the two 
bodies of work illuminates the thinking of both men, and helps
to clarify the linguistic complexity of Heide gger’s writing. In this 
book, we intend gradually to unconceal (a Heideggerian term l
Erhard has used) that clarity (IM 116). 
This is not to say that either body of thou ght ever reaches the
kind of logical understandability that we generally expect in what
we read and hear. “If you walk out of here understanding,” Erhard
tells The Forum participants at one point, “that’s the booby prize.” 
Both Heidegger and Erhard are attempting to communicate
something that, on that familiar level, cannot be communicated 
or grasped. This is new territory for communication, and requires 
both a new language (or, as Erhard says, new “languaging” ) and a
new way of listening.
We request, therefore, that the reader join us in embracin g
the atmosphere of questionability that must surround this entire
to several questions about the various colors of name ta gs worn by people in the room, one 
participant raised her hand. Erhard called upon her to stand, and she asked about Erhard ’s use 
of lan guage.
ERHARD
You need a language that gives you access to the kind of detail that you need to be a brain sur-
geon... The language you and I are going to use in here is also a specifi c language. It’s designed 
to let you get at something you can’t get at without that language. Surgeons generally confi ne 
that kind of speaking to the operating room, and so do I. I don’t use that language when I’m out
to dinner. For the most part it’s unseemly to use special lan guage when you’re with people who
don’t share in that language.
Erhard asked for more questions. After he called on someone, he explained the reasons for
standing up and for calling on multiple people (“to allow time to get microphones to them”). She 
asked about logistics. Erhard said it would happen later. She sat down.
BLAKE (after receiving a microphone from an assistant)
I don’t know whether The Forum started yet, but I wanted to get through my apprehension of 
speaking before the group.
ERHARD
I suggest that those of you who have a fear of speaking take the same opportunity as Blake did. 
In The Forum no one is required to stand up and speak, though it is in your interest to do so,
especially if you are reluctant to stand and speak.
Erhard also discussed the schedule of the course, pointin g out that the daily ending time would be 
sometime between 11:00 pm and 1:00 am, adding that
ERHARD
Nobody guarantees you that schedule. You want to be clear about that. We’re going to do this 
as long as it takes to get it done.
In addition, he said, The Forum would not be complete until the completion of the evening session, 
which would be held on the following Thursday evening—simultaneously in several cities, since 
many participants in this Forum had traveled to San Francisco for this event. Participants were 
encouraged to bring guests to their respective evenin g sessions.
As the conversation proceeded into the second hour, it gradually became clear, without transition,
that the serious business of the course had begun. A participant named Ruth rose to say that she
was pessimistic about getting the results of The Forum. Erhard began his response by acknowledg-
ing the validity of her doubt.
--- Page 23 ---
 Forum Da y One: Session One 9
ERHARD
Very, very little in life turns out the way it was promised. So I remember my mother told me if I 
was a good boy everythin g would be great in life. I tried it for one day and it didn’t work. People 
are told that when they graduate life will be wonderful, life will be easy, and it didn’t turn out 
that way. When you get married it’ll be great but it doesn’t turn out that way. People say when 
you get divorced it’ll be all right but it doesn’t turn out that way. Most things don’t live up to
their promises.
RUTH
And what about the promises of The Forum?
ERHARD
Based on surveys, most people who’ve done this work say it turned out better than they expect-
ed. For you that’ll be easy, because you have a pessimistic view about how thin gs’ll turn out. 
We’ve got your six hundred dollars. You’re not going to get it back. Given that conversation’s 
over, it’ll turn out however it turns out. You know, I’ve never been wrong about that.
(To Ruth)
I could say a lot of things to reassure you, and that would be a mistake. Your pessimism is you.
(raising his voice, he turned to the group)
Listen up! If you haven’t noticed, The Forum has begun. See, you and I think that our mood, 
our internal state, the way we are seeing things; we think that is a product of the circumstanc-t
es. So I look at something and I like it, or I look at something and I don’t like it. I think if I 
like it, it’s the fault of the thing I’m looking at, and if I don’t like it, I think it’s the fault of the 
thing I’m looking at. That’s the kind of thing that generates in me: “like”; and that’s the kind 
of thing that generates in me: “don’t like.” You and I think that our way of being is a product of 
what’s over there. As you will see as we do The Forum together a lot of what is going on with
you and me is something we already always are. It’s something I am before anything happens. 
I’m kind of a pessimist waiting for life to happen, or I’m an optimist waiting for life to happen. 
About certain kinds of thin gs I’m a pessimist before I even look at them, and then when I look 
at them, it’s hard for me to recognize that the pessimism isn’t generated out of the thing I’m 
looking at, but it’s something I brought with me. Kind of like I was already always pessimistic
and then this thing came along. So it’s good that you’re pessimistic, and if you’re not pessimis-
tic, that’s good too.
(to Ruth)
If you find yoursel f bein g that way, don’t try to chan ge it. What’s good is whatever you are, 
because that’s what you want to brin g into The Forum. If you deal with that pessimism
which you are in a certain way, you ’ll have a choice about bein g pessimistic when it is ap -
propriate. Pessimism is not a bad idea, and if you didn’t have pessimism I would give it to 
you, because one of the thin gs you’re going to find in here is that we ask you not to believe 
anythin g that ’s said in here. We ’ll talk more about that later. At any rate, the point that 
project. There is a sense in which we don’t know what we are
talking about, and the emphasis in that sentence should be placed 
on the word “know,” as implying a secure conceptual grasp. 
Talking about Being is challenging and sometimes feels, to use
the vernacular, weird. Being is both pervasive and evanescent. It 
is elusive, vanishing even as it appears. 
In his writing about Being (and all of his writing is about 
Being), Heidegger celebrates the ambiguity surrounding the topic.
This is “something which every thinker has to see afresh each 
time, else he is not a thinker: that everything that lies before us is
ambiguous” (WCT 201). However, this does not mean fuzziness atT
the expense of rigor: 
   NOTE:  Erhard believes that Heidegger’s use of the word 
“thought” leaves people misled about what Heidegger 
means in the following way: Perhaps the word “thought” is 
valid for what is written down for people to consider, but it
did not come from “thinking”—by which most people will
understand “figuring it out”—it came from something like 
“looking, ” or “just being with, ” and is pointed to by the word 
“wonder” (Erhard, interview with the authors).
     This multiplicity of possible interpretations
does not discredit the strictness of the thought
content. For all true thought remains open 
to more than one interpretation—and this by 
reason of its nature. Nor is this multiplicity of 
possible interpretations merely the residue
of a still unachieved formal-logical univocity 
which we properly ought to strive for but did 
not attain. Rather, multiplicity of meanings is 
the element in which all thought must move in 
order to be strict thought. (WCT 71)T
“
--- Page 24 ---
10 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
Nevertheless, despite its challenges, we assert t hat Being is 
also the most important t hing that one could talk about, since 
talk that evokes Being has the ability to transform talk about 
everything else.
A fundamental difference in this arena is the distinction
between ontological and l ontic inquiry. Ontological inquiry is 
concerned primarily with Being. Therefore all of Heidegger’s
writing, and all of the dialogue of The Forum, is ontological in 
nature. Ontic inquiry is concerned with beings, and with facts 
about them. Therefore all of our ever yday conversations—
everything from political discourse to casual social chat—may be
seen as ontic. 
This is not to dismiss ontic inquir y as unimportant, or to 
equate a discussion of religion or physics with coffeeshop banter. 
We are not claiming that ontological inquiry is better, but that 
it is essentially different. And in the experience of the authors, 
it is profoundly interesting because o f its transformational 
possibilities. In this book, we will illuminate the nature o f 
ontological inquiry.
A prefatory note: people who write about Heidegger’s 
work differ as to whether the term Being should be capitalized.
This is, of course, a choice for translators and not one that 
confronted Heidegger, since in German all nouns are capitalized. 
It is a problematic choice because capitalization tends to reif y 
or even deify, suggesting to some scholars that Being is “an 
eternal metaphysical foundation or eternal principle,” while 
for Heidegger it was “the event in which an entity reveals or t
shows itself” (Michael E. Zimmerman, Heidegger’s Confrontation 
with Modernity: Technology, Politics, Art xxii). Others feel thatt
capitalization is important so that what it means to exist (Being)
is not confused with the entities that exist (bein gs) (Richard Polt
Heidegger: An Introductio n 3). 
In print, Erhard himself did not capitalize the term: a 1985 
Forum brochure states that the purpose of The Forum is to 
provide participants with “direct access to the domain o f being 
itself.” In his more recent work, such as documents outlining 
I want to make now is that whatever it is that you’re feeling, or whatever it is that you’re
thinking, or w hatever your menta l state is, or w hatever your perception is, t he way you are
viewing things—that’s exactly the way it ought to be. I’m going to probably have to say that 
to you ten times, because you won ’t remember that.
(to the group)
Another way you already always are is stupid about yourself. If that sounded a little bit like an
insult, you got it right. You may not be able to see that about yourself, but you’ll be able to see it
about others. As I said: not you, but other people.
(laughter)
There are ways of being with yourself that are disempowering and disenabling. You lose power 
and you lose ability. Whatever way you fi nd yourself now, and whatever ways you fi nd yourself 
variously throughout The Forum or in the evenings, or on the breaks: that’s the way you’re sup-
posed to be—whatever way that is. One way to disempower or disenable yoursel f is to question
whether you are being the right way... You’ll get a lot more out of The Forum a lot faster if you 
let yourself be the way you are.
(pausing)
There’s a lot of this you’re not going to get. Some of it won’t make any sense. You’re not going 
to get the whole Forum. The questions we’re asking in here are too powerful to get it all. The 
Forum leaders are still getting it. So am I. But there are parts when you need to get it. In those
parts, put up your hand if you don’t. There will be a lot of repetition in here, too. For the fourth
time: you should be the way you are! However you feel, that’s the way it ought to be. The way 
I know that is, that’s the way it is... The only right way to do The Forum is to be the way you’re 
being. If you say you shouldn’t be pessimistic, you’re getting in your way.
A participant complained that she was distracted by and resent ful about the physical set-up for this 
Forum—t he cameras, the observers, etc.
ERHARD
What you want to get out of that is that life is upsetting because it isn’t the way you expected it 
to be. The Forum will be that way also. What you want to get out of that is that you’re already 
upset. You’re already always upset at any change, at anything that violates your expectations. 
You think you’re not upset until something violates your expectations. I said this strange thing:
you are already always upset. You live upset. I know you don’t believe that and I’m not asking 
you to. You’re an upset waiting to happen. You’ll see that more clearly as we proceed.
LYNETTE
I’m often upset.
ERHARD
You’re always upset, and sometimes you notice it.
ERHARD (continuing)
--- Page 25 ---
 Forum Day One: Sess ion One 11
LYNETTE
Do you have any more advice about how to get the most out of this?
ERHAR D
I do and we’ll go over that this morning.
TRENT
I hear there are Forum leaders here.
ERHAR D
Forum leaders are here as part of their job.
TRENT
Four consecutive days instead of two weekends?
ERHAR D
We’ve done this using odd schedules in diff erent settings, for instance, in  prisons.
BLAKE (who expressed reservations about speakin g)
Continuing what you were saying as far as upset is concerned, and always bein g with you. My 
barrier is the fear of revealin g who I am. I should accept that.
ERHAR D
Whatever you think is in the way, especially those thin gs you think are part of the circum -
stances— for instance, you don’t get along with your boss and it’s quite clear to you that’s 
because you work for a jerk—brin g that in here. Blake is clear that it’s something he carries
around with him; it doesn’t come out of the circumstances. That’s easy. It’s the stuff  you think
is a product of the circumstances. So if there are circumstances in here, for instance, because
there are people observing—that sounds like it is a product o f the circumstances.
CHRISSY
You talked about being in The Forum whatever way you are being. What about outside
The Forum?
ERHARD
Let yourself be like you are in those parts of The Forum that are outside The Forum, for
homework assignments during the breaks, etc. If that’s your mood at the moment, don’t try to
change it. You want it there because if it isn’t there it’s not going to get dealt with—particularl y 
those things you think are part of the circumstances: brin g that in here. Most of what you do
outside The Forum in the next four days is going to be inside The Forum. If you do something 
to avoid that, then you’ve successfully avoided that once more. See, there’s a lot of this you’re
his development of an ontological/phenomenological model o f 
leadership (https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/ cf_dev/ AbsByAuth.
cfm?per_id=433651), he continues to employ the lowercase. 
In this book, we will employ capitalization in those instances 
where it clarifies the word’s meaning in a specific sentence. 
We raise the point here to emphasize the unique nature of the
issues that arise in any discussion, oral or written, of this subject. 
Being/being, as an ontological phenomenon, defies grammatical
categorization. ■
   NOTE:  As of 2019, Landmark Worldwide’s Forum leader 
faculty included more than 60 people, representing a diver-
sity in gender and race, and hailing from countries including
the United States of America, India, Ja pan, Australia, 
New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Canada, Israel, the
Netherlands and Switzerland. 
--- Page 26 ---
12 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
not going to like. You’re sitting there now with a whole bunch of assessments and conclusions.
We’ve done this a lot. I can even tell you what your assessments and conclusions are.
A participant asked whether, based on all of this, he should keep his speci fi c issues and concerns
foremost in his mind.
ERHARD
You don’t need to have something you’re kind of holding in place. We will hook what’s there
in you that’s appropriate to be hooked and pull it up to the surface. So you can kind of relax 
about that. A lot of stuff  you won’t even think about will get handled in here.
Another participant asked about the history of the organization.
ERHARD
We’ve been doing this work since 1971 and it was at the end of 1984 that we fi nished a four-
year process of developing The Forum, and we’ve been off ering The Forum since 1985 all over 
this country, and in lots of other countries around the world.
At this point, a man named Jake rose to complain about the purpose o f the evening session, to
which participants had been encouraged to invite guests.
JAKE
Isn’t that more for Werner Erhard and Associates to hustle more members?
ERHARD
You know that you are a hustle waiting to happen, right?
JAKE
I said I feel like I’m being hustled.
ERHARD
I said you are a guy who is being hustled waiting to happen.
JAKE
I don’t mind being hustled.
ERHARD
I said you are a guy who is being hustled waiting to happen.
JAKE
I don’t see it that way.
Erhard came down from the stage and sat on the edge of the platform near him.
Dasein
At the outset, it is important to introduce a term that is central 
in Martin Heidegger’s work, and will therefore begin to come up 
here almost immediately.
Dasein is Heidegger’s word for the Being of human beings,
and is one of the few terms in English editions of his writing 
that consistently remain untranslated from the German. In 
fact, the 2014 Dictionary of Untranslatables, published by
Princeton University Press, calls the word “a paradigm of the 
untranslatable,” and devotes six double-columned pages to a
struggle to explain it (Adam Gopnik, “Word Magic,” New Yorker,. 
May 26, 2014, 37).
A problem with translating this term, o f course, is that term
is central in Heidegger’s most important work, Being and Time, 
in which he presents his ontological model o f human beings. 
The specific elements of this model will be discussed in further 
detail as we proceed. For now, it is sufficient to note that Dasein 
will be spoken of as if the term indicates an individual; but since
it indicates the Being of that individual, it refers at the same time 
more broadly to the collective Bein g of human beings.  
ERHARD (continuing)
--- Page 27 ---
 Forum Da y One: Session One 13
ERHARD
You’re oriented around being hustled. You would see hustle where other people wouldn’t be
smart enough to see it.
JAKE
I could go along with that.
ERHARD
You are a guy who is being hustled waiting to happen. Remember I said people are upset wait-
ing to happen? You’re hustle waiting to happen.
JAKE
I’m still not getting it.
ERHARD
Okay good, then we’ll keep doing it until you do get it.
JAKE
In front of all these people? 
ERHARD
Sure. You see hustle where others don’t. You are already always being hustled. You are waiting 
for it to happen. You wake up that way in the morning, you just don’t have the circumstances to 
express it yet.
JAKE
I think I see that... I am. I’m on the watch-out. I watch my bucks.
ERHARD
I’ve already got your bucks, don’t I? Before this is over I’m going to get some more of your
bucks.
JAKE
That’s a challenge.
ERHARD
With you, I’d almost bet on it.
He remained seated on the edge of the platform as this interaction modulated from confrontational 
to friendly.
--- Page 28 ---
14 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
ERHARD (continuing)
That by the way was meant as a compliment. I’m going to off er you an opportunity to do this 
for the rest of your life, because I’m clear that you’re going to get a lot of value out of this and
I’m going to off er you the opportunity to get more value. You will always have the power to
decline. I want you to know that’s there in the relationship between me and you. I have no
reluctance to hustling you, because you always have the power to decline. Is that clear?
JAKE
Yeah, I got it.
The fi rst mornin g of The Forum continued as a dialogue with the group as Erhard responded to
participants’ questions. One woman expressed a concern that the content would go “over her head.”
ERHARD
Most of what I say is not designed for your head. Understanding is not the problem in life. If 
you took a four-day course in how to be a tennis player and you left the course as a great tennis 
player without understanding a word of it, the diff erence would be your being a great tennis
player. We don’t promise you any understanding. You’re welcome to understand. I like this 
stuff , so I enjoy understanding it. That’s a quirk in me. We do this so that there’s a freedom
to be. If you walk out understanding, that’s the booby prize. You walk out of here with the 
freedom to be that you didn’t have when you walked in here, then you got something for your
money. Speaking in here is designed to create the freedom to be... You don’t understand what 
that means. What interests me is the freedom to be. You’ll be interested in that too before this 
is over. I’ve done The Forum before so I know it works out.
A woman stated that she was already always nervous.
ERHARD (to the group)
How many people in here are already always nervous? 
(most raising their hands)
You understand that the things that are going on with you are going on with everybody? You’re 
like a rainstorm. You’ve got to get that there’s nothing personal about a rainstorm—that is,
that it waters the little fl owers. You think that the rainstorm is worried about life on earth. You 
think that it rains so that... it rains in-order-to. It’s true that life is sustained by the rain, but it’s
not true that it rains in-order-to.
SAL (standing up, receiving a microphone)
You’re just arguing semantics.
ERHARD
No, it’s not semantics. Or the other answer to that is, yes it’s semantics, but so is everythin g else 
in the universe.
Two Theses
The first thesis of this book, which will be addressed directly in 
the text, is that the work of Werner Erhard is aligned in important 
ways with the thinking of Martin Heidegger. Our purpose is to 
show this alignment through a comparative analysis of their work, 
an analysis that not only illuminates the thinking of both men, but 
sheds light as well on the nature of their shared central concern.
The second thesis, equal in importance to the first, cannot 
be addressed directly in the text. We have indicated it with the 
term Being, since unless we indicate it we cannot talk about it— as 
Heidegger puts it, “one cannot get by in public without rubrics” 
(OWL 29). But the term serves merely as a place-holder, since 
what it indicates cannot be thought, or even thought about, in our 
--- Page 29 ---
 Forum Da y One: Session One 15
SAL 
I believe that when it rains it rains in order to sustain life.
ERHARD
Okay, let’s stay there. Anybody else in that ballpark with Sal? Stand up if you are. Stand up if it 
rains in-order-to.
(a number of people rose)
If you’re not standing and you are an in-order-to, you’re interfering with your participation in 
The Forum. These people who are standing are not silly. They’ve got their foot nailed to the 
fl oor someplace. This will happen to all of you a lot of times durin g The Forum.
(to Sal, indicating the director’s chair on the platform )
Are the legs there to hold up the chair? We know that the legs do hold up the chair. For the legs, 
is there any in-order-to? Are the legs in-ordering-to?
(pausing) 
It’s too hard that way... let me try something diff erent. Is the wall standin g in order to hold the
ceiling up?
SAL 
Yes, in my opinion. 
ERHARD
Does the lightning lightning in order to start forest fi res?
SAL 
No.
ERHARD
Where is this organ of intentionality in the rainstorm?
SAL 
The spirituality of the universe.
ERHARD  (to the group)
He just told me where his foot’s nailed to the fl oor. He’s got something he believes so he can’t 
think about it.
(to Sal)
You think there’s an intentionality in the rainstorm. You said it’s your belief that matter was
invaded by spirit in some way. Does it rain in order to produce fl oods?
usual way of conceptualizing. Think “freedom” and a conceptual
barrage is evoked; think “Being” and the mind’s resources are few. 
Our second thesis, since it eludes ca pture in concepts, 
can only be hinted at. It exists always as a background, 
in a domain of language that remains always unspoken. 
Unspoken, it is the unexamined context that shapes the wa y we
understand everythin g else; unspoken, it is made present as 
the transformational background in the dialogue of The Forum;
unspoken, it is hinted at persistently in Heidegger’s writing and in 
his lectures. Our second thesis , then, is this unspoken domain of 
language, formally referred to as the ontological realm. 
In this book, to show what Werner Erhard and Martin 
Heidegger are doing in their work, the authors are called upon 
to say—to hint at—t he unspoken shared dynamic at the center 
of that work. Inevitabl y, an element of mystery attends this
topic; but nothing here is devious or arcane. While ontological
communication makes rigorous demands on our everyday
understanding, Erhard’s work is a practical pedagogical 
methodology, demonstrating that education beyond the merely 
epistemological is a real-world possibility.
The authors intend that our second thesis will be 
communicated in the background as we proceed through this
book, leaving the reader with a hint of its nature as it emerges in
The Forum. 
One aspect of this back ground communication is that 
unfamiliar terms or concepts may not be fully defined at the 
point of their first appearance. Rather, the y will be distinguished 
gradually as they appear and reappear in the text. A definition
specifies conceptual limits; a distinction o pens a space for 
thinking and acting, and the space is expanded each time the
distinction is encountered. The goal of the inquiry, then, is 
never an answer, but the opening of a question from which 
to experience the world. We invite the reader to embrace the 
freedom that this background o f questionability gives: at play in 
the question, you don’t need the right answer.  ■
--- Page 30 ---
16 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
SAL 
No.
ERHARD
So the intentionality organ is not operating when it produces fl oods?
SAL
No, that just happens.
ERHARD
But it doesn’t 
just happen that when it rains life is sustained? Remember, Sal, there’s no ques-
tion between you and me that water does sustain life. The  question is: does it rain in-order-to? 
Or does it just happen, and by the way, it sustains life?
At this point Sal seemed to see Erhard’s point, and sat down.
ERHARD (to Sal)
Okay. Now, just something personal between you and me. I’ve done this a lot. There’s some-
thing I appreciated about you in this conversation. You were open in the conversation.
(to the group)
Nobody’s ever going to win with me in here. Because this is my game, and only an asshole 
would try to win in another guy’s game. You and I had a discussion where we got somethingt
together. Rain is impersonal. We weren’t talking about a higher order of things. I don’t want 
anybody to believe anythin g I say. And I’m not interested in sustaining anything you believe.
BLAKE (recalling what had happened up to this moment in the conversation)
I know that there was some sequence and I missed it. I mentioned that I was nervous, that I 
didn’t like it, and then we were talking about the rain.
ERHARD (to the group)
He just demonstrated not knowing, being clear he didn’t know. That’s diff erent from being con-
fused. This is one of those thin gs to get. There’s a diff erence between knowin g that you don’t
understand, knowing that you didn’t follow something; knowing something didn’t make sense 
and being confused are very diff  erent. You didn’t invent being nervous. Even though the rain is 
impersonal, you do personally get wet. The same thing goes for being nervous. Being nervous 
is part of being human. Being human doesn’t belong to you; you belong to it. You didn’t invent 
being human. You were late for the party. Being human is an already always way o f being that
you walked into. It’s like a rainstorm, and it’s true you personally got wet. You are a human
Ontologic al Dialogue
A striking aspect of Erhard’s method, one which appears again 
and again throughout The Forum, is his persistence in pressin g 
any interaction or any topic of discussion throu gh to completion. 
Complete, for Erhard, does not mean simply finished, but rather 
whole, and lacking none of its essential parts. Repeatedly, after 
he has been engaged on a particular point with an individual, he 
requests that others in the room who are not clear on that point 
stand, and works with each participant individually until all o f 
them have “gotten” it for themselves. Erhard o ften uses the term 
“flatten” in the same sense, as in “Let’s get that one flat before 
we move on.” To get something flat, in an ontological dialogue, 
means that the item in question has been moved beyond a purely
conceptual level of understandin g, and has been distinguished 
as an ontological possibility, at least in a preliminary sense. The
distinction will continue to be teased out as The Forum proceeds, 
ultimately becoming a clearing for Being; but the first step in that 
process is to flatten the concept, so that its ontolo gical possibility 
can be heard. 
Of course, “getting it” and “bein g complete” might be 
read as “having surrendered to Erhard’s point of view.” Erhard 
himself seemed to support this interpretation, telling one Forum 
participant Blake, “Nobody’s ever going to win with me in here. 
Because this is my game, and only an asshole would try to win in 
another guy’s game.” During a debriefing session with The Forum 
leaders regarding their role in the dialogue, Erhard again re ferred 
to the process in agonistic terms: “You’ve got to have some 
appreciation for the advantage you’ve got there,” he said. “And 
yeah, you’re going to use the advantage, that’s part of the game.”
--- Page 31 ---
 Forum Da y One: Session One 17
being, but you didn’t make up human being. You didn’t invent being nervous. You didn’t invent
having a barrier to expressing yourself. That doesn’t belong to you. That’s not yours. That’s in
the already always bein g of human being. It doesn’t belong to you; you belong to it.
(forcefully)
It owns you! You don’t own it. Being nervous owns your life. You don’t own being nervous. The 
metaphor is that there’s nothing personal about a rainstorm. It just rains, and I, you, personall y 
get wet. But the rainstorm didn’t rain in order to get me wet. Being nervous is already always
there in the being of being human. And you and I walk out into that rainstorm and get wet... 
In The Forum, you get back the power to say something about your own way of being. Now 
you can only report on it. But you can’t say “I’m not nervous” and have it make any diff erence. 
After The Forum you will be able to.
BLAKE
I’m not as nervous as when I first stood up. I am here to make a chan ge, find a new occupa -
tion, to get up in front of people. What it requires is gettin g up.
ERHAR D
Not necessarily.
BLAKE
Well, I don’t know.
ERHAR D
That’s right. And I do know.
BLAKE
That’s why I’m asking you.
ERHARD
I want to get it settled because you’re going to keep saying those stupid kinds of things: what
you have to do and what you don’t have to do for this to work. And the answer is you don’t
know. So I’m gonna tell you: what you have to do is what you do. So you’ll always know what
you have to do because you’re doing what you’re doing. To do something you’re not doing:
that’s bad. If you do what you do it’ll all work out. One of the things that you are doing is think-
ing you have to stand up. That’s fi ne for you to think that. You wanna know why I think it’s
fi ne for him to think that? Because that’s what he’s thinking.
BLAKE
You’re right. At some point you broke through whatever was in the way and now you’re up
there doing what you are doing.
The game in The Forum is the evocation o f the presence 
of Being, and The Forum leader’s opponent is the way of being
that we in the technological age have been born into (the way 
we wound up being). Clearly, there is a certain direction which 
must be maintained in The Forum dialogue if its purpose is
to be achieved. The maintenance of this direction in the face 
of participants’ resistance might appear, to the everyday
understanding, as motivated by a need on The Forum leader’s
part to win the game, so that The Forum’s perspective is shown 
to be the true one. However, accepted in The Forum is that The
Forum leader’s responsibility is maintaining the ontological 
character of the conversation. “My job,” said Erhard, “is to 
manage the dialogue.” This management is not a matter of 
winning, but of keeping the way in view. In a recent conversation 
with the authors, Erhard put it this wa y: “I used this way of 
speaking to deal with people who are resistin g in order to resist, 
rather than functioning in a dialogue.”
Any discussion of dialogue as pedagogy must always consider 
the question of mutuality, and this is especially delicate when the
dialogue’s purpose is the presencing of Being. The Forum leaders’ 
rank in The Forum dialogue is given by their ability to listen to 
the conversation from a certain perspective. As Erhard told The 
Forum leaders, “You’ve got to know that an authentic dialogue is 
going to generate clarity. You’ve also got to watch you don’t get
hooked. What hooks [you] is when someone says something that
you think puts you at a disadvanta ge.” Being hooked, for a Forum
leader, means being drawn into argument or commiseration with
participants’ stories about their lives, rather than maintaining
the transformed perspective given by The Forum’s ontological
distinctions. It is The Forum leader’s job not to get hooked.
This balance between mutuality and directedness in an 
ontological dialogue is an important matter. Obviously, there is
a thrust to such a dialogue—a movement o f the conversation in 
the direction of its ontolo gical intention. In his dialogue with the
Japanese scholar in On the Way to Language, Heidegger points 
to the nature of true dialogue when he states that “we may 
--- Page 32 ---
18 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
BLAKE (pausing)
It’s really hard for me not to be funny.
ERHARD
Yeah. You’re already always funny.
BLAKE
And I don’t want to be silly or you’re going to get mad at me. It’s just a temptation to always be
funny.
ERHARD
It
’s the way you avoid dealing with what you don’t want to deal with, which is being anything 
but funny. That’s what you don’t want to deal with. You learned how to deal with being funny.
You got that down very well and the rest of it you’re a little nervous about. But you’re not ner-
vous about being funny, are you?
BLAKE
N
o.
ERHARD
And you’re not nervous about whatever your racket is either. You’re 
just nervous about the rest
of it. I know you don’t understand half of what we’re talking about, but that’s all right. Just the
fi rst couple hours.
BLAKE
I don’t want to be nervous anymore.
ERHARD
Somebod
y write that down for me.
BLAKE
I’m not a dictator and so I have to live with the things I’m not comfortable with, and when I’m
uncomfortable, other people are uncomfortable. I don’t like that.
ERHARD
Thanks... The next subject. Everybody ready for the next sub ject?
A participant named Charles, who was still concerned with the conversation about the rain, rose.
CHARLE S
I’m with “it rains so that life is sustained.”
confidently entrust ourselves to the hidden drift of our 
dialogue. . . as long as we remain inquirers” (“DL ” in OWL 30,
emphasis added). In true dialogue—which always has an 
unspoken ontological intent—the dialogue itself can be trusted to 
move us along if we, as participants, continue to be a certain way. 
Notice the reflexive nature of the process: simultaneous surrender 
and evocation. In The Forum, the maintenance of this delicate 
balance is The Forum leader’s task.
A central element of The Forum’s effectiveness is the
inclusiveness of its conversation: interactions between The Forum 
leader and those participants who actively engage in the dialogue
are conducted in front of the entire group, so that even those 
participants who are listenin g and observin g are able to derive 
the benefits of those interactions. 
For both Heidegger and Erhard, a shared tendency of human
being underlies all of our diverse individual and cultural concerns. 
The assumption of The Forum’s methodology is that a skillfully 
managed dialogue between two people can a ffect the ontological
insight of others who are listening to that dialogue, and who share
the tendency of being that generates it. 
A participant whose concern is her relationshi p with her 
employer can recognize, in another participant’s discussion of his 
problems with his mother, the same existential structure that is at 
the source of her own problem. Thus The Forum leader re gularly 
exhorts participants to “listen from your own concerns.” ■
--- Page 33 ---
 Forum Da y One: Session One 19
ERHARD
What we were discussin g is this in-order-to. I say the rain has no intention to do anything.
There’s nothing there that could intend. It just rains when it rains. There’s no intention in the
rain. Look, Charles, I ’m doing something in the conversation which is designed to allow you to
take a look at your own beliefs. I’m asking questions which reduce your thesis to an absurdity.
If I ask if it rains in order to destroy life, you have to say yes if you believe that it rains in order
to sustain life, and so it makes you reexamine your theory. If you can consider the possibility 
that there is no intention in the rainstorm, then you are no longer stuck with what you used to 
believe.
CHARLE S
I’ll keep looking at it.
ERHARD
We have to go quickly now or there won’t be any fi fth ni ght. There’ll be a twelfth night. 
Someone raised a question about why participants were not allowed to take notes in The Forum, a policy 
that had been communicated when they registered for the course.
ERHARD
Because we don’t want you to retain information. So you don’t get stuck trying to remember 
something. You think Bjorn Borg remembers how to hold the tennis racket? This is no diff erent
than the conversation about the rainstorm.
(loudly)
You have this superstition that you do things because you remember how to do them! You don’t 
drive your car, play tennis, or live li fe powerfully and eff ectively out of anything you remember. 
If Joe Montana had to remember how to throw the football when he’s back in the pocket, he’d
get killed every Sunday.
A woman named Doris rose with a question about the rainstorm:
DORIS
What about the role of ultimate being in natural events?
ERHARD
I don’t like to discuss ultimate being with people who don’t know their ass from a hole in the 
ground.
DORIS
I 
fi nd that response prett y off ensive.
--- Page 34 ---
20 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
DORIS (stammering slightly) 
Are you inferring that I don’t . . .?
ERHARD
No.
(pausing) 
We don’t know yet. 
DORIS
I assure you I do. 
ERHARD
Really? We’ll see. You either do or you don’t, so there’s nothing to be nervous about. Then we 
could discuss ultimate being. 
(pausing)
I want you to get that I am not a guy in a diner.
He moved toward the back row where Doris was standing:
ERHARD (continuing) 
When I was growing up on the east coast, my family took trips to visit people. And we would 
drive home, oftentimes very late at night, oftentimes when it was raining or snowing or nasty. 
And diners, as far as I knew, were places where you stopped to get a cup of coff ee so you could
stay awake while you were driving. And at my age I couldn’t let anybody do anything without
my being there, so I always had to go in with them. And I learned about guys in diners. Guys in
diners, late at night like I’m describing to you, are usually fairly lonely, because they don’t have 
anybody to talk to. And they just love for somebody to stop in because then they’ve got some-
body to talk to. And you know, you go in, and you’re the only person there, and you sit up at the
counter, and you have your cup of coff  ee and whatever else. And you fi nd out that this guy in 
the  diner—the guy behind the counter—knows everythin g about everything. There is nothing 
about which he does not know. He knows what the president ought to do about the defi cit, he 
knows what the country ought to do about international relationships, he knows what you 
ought to do about your marriage, he knows what kind of work you ought to do and how what-
ever kind of work you are doing how you could do it better, he knows something about every-
thing. Most people are like a guy in a diner. Goddamned near everybody knows everythin g 
about everything. So in here—at least in The Forum—I question everythin g. Everything—in-
cluding whether or not you know your ass from a hole in the ground. And whether anyone is
qualifi ed to discuss ultimate bein g. I didn’t say you weren’t. That’s the way I do The Forum.
(to Doris)
Okay? 
Being-in-the-world: Being-in
An important term that Werner Erhard often emplo ys in his work, 
and one which is central in the thinking of Martin Heidegger is 
Being-in-the-world. To indicate clearly that a human being in his 
model of things is not a self-contained Cartesian subject, separate 
from an objective world “out there,” Heide gger never presents 
Dasein’s Being as disconnected, either from others or from the 
world. Dasein’s Being is Being-in-the-world. This indicates “a
unitary phenomenon” which “must be seen as a whole” (y BT 78).T
However, while “Being-in-the-world cannot be broken up into 
contents which may be pieced together,” the constituent parts 
may be “brought out for emphasis.” One of these parts is Being-in.
--- Page 35 ---
 Forum Day One: Sess ion One 21
DORIS 
Okay.
She sat. A man rose to object to Erhard’s earlier assertion that our ways of being, such as nervous-
ness, own us. 
FOSTER
I understand that being nervous is a human quality. Why don’t I own being nervous? Isn’t that 
a quality of me? 
ERHARD 
Where is this quality? 
FOSTER (pointing to his heart)
Here, and it’s pounding! 
ERHARD 
My dog’s heart pounds. You and I explain things about people by assigning qualities to them. 
But this may not be eff ective i f what you want to do is have access to the things you’re explain-
ing. The language we use every day is designed to explain things. The language we use in here 
is designed to gain access to thin gs. So it’s a diff erent language. Explanations give no access to
power. If you want power and access, we’re going to invent such a language in here. I’m not 
limited to merely reporting the way I am. I’m an anti-quality-ist. You ain’t got any qualities 
inside you. Qualities are an explanator y principle. It won’t hold up on closer examination. 
Erhard was now in the aisle, moving among the participants. One rose to defend the importance of 
having what he called self-beliefs.
RAY
How does one hold beliefs about oneself and about reality in a way to be powerful and creative?
ERHARD
One of the ways is to not have any beliefs. Does anyone need to believe that the fl oor is there? 
You don’t need to have any belief about the fl oor and it works just fi ne. And if you didn’t have 
any beliefs about gravity it would work just fi ne. You only need to believe in things that you 
doubt. The only problem with belief is that you can’t think about anything you believe.k
RAY
I have an interpretation about myself, and how do I hold that interpretation?
ERHARD
As an interpretation.
Being-in articulates an essentially di fferent relationship
from the one we usually have in mind when we say something is
“in” something. If we say “the water is in the glass,” for example, 
the two phenomena being related have a prior and individual 
existence in space: the water was there, and the glass was there. 
We have simply put one in the other. Further, as Heidegger points
out, we can easily extend such relationships outward: the glass is
on the table, the table is in the kitchen, the kitchen is in the house, 
and so on, until finally we can say that the water is in “world 
space” (BT 79).T
Objects such as the glass and the table are, in Heidegger’s 
vocabulary, “things occurring ‘within’ the world” (BT 79).T
Therefore they have a different kind of bein g from Dasein. The
table and the glass are whats; their characteristics are categorical.
While the table and the glass can have a location-relationship
within the world, the water is not in the glass in the same way that
a human being is in-the-world. 
Dasein, on the other hand, is a who, and its characteristics
are existential, which define an existence structure quite different
from that of a table. This is, of course, on one level obvious. 
But Heidegger, remember, is languaging a view of the world 
that is very different from our everyday way of understanding
things. Therefore he is rigorous in setting out the terminological 
differences between states of bein g.
A chair can be next to the wall , but the chair can never touch
the wall, “even if the space between them should be e qual to
zero” (BT 81). Heidegger is not making a sensory distinction but T
an ontological one. To touch is to encounter meaningfully, and 
such meaningful encounters are possible only for entities with
meaning. In Heidegger’s vocabulary, a table and a chair are 
worldless.
Werner Erhard can be seen as distinguishing worldlessness 
early in The Forum, in his interactions with participants on t he
subject of whether the rain falls in order to water the flowers. In 
doing so, he is beginning to create an understanding o f meaning 
as a human characteristic, rather than an aspect o f the things out
there in the world. This distinction will be further develo ped later 
--- Page 36 ---
22 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
RAY
Thank you.
Shortly before the fi rst break of the mornin g, Erhard introduced a new topic: 
ERHAR D
The next subject is the matter of your being here. At the upcoming break, you will be given an 
opportunity to leave and have your money refunded. You want to listen up! I’m going to give
you the opportunity not to be here. You shouldn’t be here if you didn’t put yourself here. The 
Forum won’t work for you anyhow, so you’re wasting your time here. You shouldn’t be here if 
you’re here because you were threatened. We don’t allow people to participate in The Forum
who were coerced or threatened. You may have been here on that basis up till now. You can 
leave now and you’ll get all your money back. And if you’ll get in trouble with whoever you’re
here for, I’ll write a note that says that you begged and pleaded and tried to stay here and I 
threw you out. If you’re here because you were pressured into being here, would you stand up 
please?
(one participant stood)
Anybody else?
(another long pause as another stood) 
I’m going to say “Anybody else?” fi ve more times.
Eventually several people stood in response to his request, and he be gan to interact with them
individually. The interactions varied strikin gly in their tone. With the fi rst participant, a teena ger 
named Kathy, Erhard’s manner was quite gentle. He moved closer to her, standing at a distance of 
about four feet. Before beginning the conversation, he asked her if she was willin g to interact with 
him in front of the group, acknowledging that it might be “scary” for her to do so. He then reiterat-
ed his assertion that pressure, like embarrassment and hustle, was a clearing she was bringing to 
the circumstances:
ERHARD (continuing)
I know that if you’re here because somebody pressured you to be here, that that’s an issue in 
your life. The only people who experience being pressured about The Forum are those for 
whom pressure is an issue. I’m giving you the opportunity to make a choice. Now that I’ve
given you the choice, would you like to leave or would you like to be here? There will be no bad
results from you leaving. You’ll get your money back. 
KATHY 
That’s good. I feel like I have the opportunity to choose now, whereas, before, I didn’t feel like
that.
on the first day when participants’stories about the events in 
their lives are distinguished from the events themselves .
Human beings exist in a world of meaning, and thei r 
relationship with that world is fundamental. In-ness is an aspect
of Dasein’s existence from the ground up. Consider: a human
being never exists as a (meaningful) human being until she exists
in-the-world, and when she leaves the world (dies), she ceases to
exist (as a human being). Heidegger’s German term for the Being-
in relationship (Sein bei) carries the implication of what we would
call being at home (BT 80, note 3). Dasein is at home in the world,T
Being-with others. “Being-with” is examined in the first sidebar o f 
Session One of Day Two, and we address the “world” of Being-in -
the-world at the be ginning of Session One of Day Four. ■
--- Page 37 ---
 Forum Da y One: Session One 23
ERHARD
I only do this work with people for whom it’s going to be successful, so I’m not willing to do 
this work except on the basis that people chose to be here. What’s your choice?
KATHY
I choose to be in The Forum. 
ERHARD
No coercion? That’s your choice? Made freely?
KATHY
Yes. 
ERHARD
Thank you for going through the process in front of all these people.
Along with Kathy, two other people sat down. The only participant who remained standing was a 
young man in the front row named Bill, who spoke as soon as an assistant got a microphone to him:
BILL (angrily)
I think there’s kind of a thin line between choice and being compelled to do something because
someone cared enough to continuously call me up and get me here.
ERHARD (moving in to a face-to-face stance with Bill)
You’re an asshole, and somebody...
BILL
Your language is bad.
ERHARD
It’s much worse than you think it is. You don’t want to fuck with me.
BILL
You don’t scare me.
ERHARD
You’re in my game, my friend, you don’t want to fuck with me.
BILL
Someone should use lan
guage to try to clear a point.
ERHARD
I understand what you believe. I’m not interested.
--- Page 38 ---
24 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
BILL
That’s quite obvious.
ERHARD
Now do you have something to say that’s thoughtful? Because I’m not interested in your beliefs.
BILL
You’re competing with me in your lack of thoughtfulness in the terminology that you use on a 
regular basis, my friend.
ERHARD
Reall
y?
BILL
Yes. Thoughtfulness is as thoughtfulness does. To be thoughtful I would expect a mutual kind
of communication.
ERHARD
You got a mutual kind of communication. You got bullshit for bullshit.
BILL
Thank you very much. You are quite impressive.
ERHARD
Thank you. Are you here because you were pressured into being here?
BILL
I 
drove here.
ERHARD
I understand. Were you pressured into bein
g here? I know you’re not here because you were 
pressured into being here. I can take one look at you and know that wasn’t true. I know you’re
up there to fuck with me.
BILL
Now...
ERHARD
Hold on, let me talk for a while. So you’re going to tell me the story about people called you a 
lot of times and people kept inviting you and kept saying you were supposed to. Understand? 
That’s the story you’re going to tell me and I already know the story. You won’t be the fi rst
person with that story. This is a story I’ve heard a lot of times. Now why was I bad with you 
MOOD
Heidegger’s masterwork, Being and Time, presents a model o f 
human being that focuses on our lived, everyday experience. This
“average everydayness,” he says, has been generally disregarded
in attempts to understand our nature. It is so apparent and well-
known to us that we fail to recognize the ontological significance
of its elements. One of these elements is mood.
Mood, or state-of-mind (d Befindlichkeit) is a manifestation of 
the moment-to-moment way one is automatica lly attuned to the 
world. My mood provides a context—a background environment—
in which I move; it pervades and colors my relationship to 
whatever I am up to at any moment, for instance, when Erhard 
says “your pessimism is you.” In bad moods, “Dasein becomes 
blind to itself” (BT 175). And while we may not notice it, says T
Heidegger, a human being always has some mood, even when its 
specific nature is elusive: 
The pallid, evenly balanced lack of mood, 
which is oft en persistent and which is not to be 
mistaken for a bad mood, is far from nothing
at all. Rather, it is in this that Dasein becomes 
satiated with itself. Being has become
manifest as a burden. Why that should be, one
does not know.ww (BT 173) T
“
Furthermore, “when we master a mood, we do so b y way
of a counter-mood; we are never free of moods” (BT 175). MoodT
is the persistent background o f our lives. Our moods come over 
us, and our cognition cannot reach their source: “The pure ‘that 
it is’ shows itself, but the ‘whence’ and the ‘whither’ remain in 
darkness” (BT 173).T
This last point will be seen as si gnificant as The Forum 
approaches its climax: we are always brought be fore ourselves
--- Page 39 ---
 Forum Da y One: Session One 25
just now? Because I want to get this story up. There’s a lot of people with that story here and
I want to get that story killed. I got people’s attention here. I got your attention too, but more
important: I got their attention.
(to the group)
I know you’ve got a story about how you got here. That’s your story. I don’t know what the truth 
is. I know Bill was a pain in the ass.
BILL
Thank you.
ERHARD
You were, and you probably are most of the time. Do other people in here know you?
BILL
I’m not sure.
ERHARD
If I had a 
group of your friends here and asked them, “can Bill be a real pain in the ass?” what 
would they say? 
BILL 
Well I ima
gine if they pushed me to extremes...
(laughter)
ERHARD (shaking his head)
Wait, wait. That’s not what I mean. I mean, if I said to your friends, “can Bill be a real pain in
the ass?” what would they say? I would bet they would say “yes.” More than infrequently.
BILL
What about your friends?
ERHARD
Let me explain something to you.
BILL
You put me on the spot, why can’t I put you on the spot?
ERHARD
I didn’t pa
y to be in here, you did. Because you invested $625 to come to my seminar. But if I
leave here and I’m still an asshole, I didn’t lose anything. If you’ve got a seminar that keeps you 
in our moods, but we tend to turn away from what they might 
reveal. In moods, we find ourselves, but “in a way of finding which 
arises not so much from a direct seeking as rather from a fleeing”
(BT 174). In our assured, everyday way of speaking, we dismissT
a state-of-mind, or rather, an attunement, as “just a mood I’m 
in.” But in doing so, we evade a more primordial disclosure, an
understanding which stares us in the face “with the inexorability
of an enigma” (BT 175). T
At this early point in the proceedings, Erhard is making two 
important moves. First, he is suggesting to the participants that
the nature of their moods is not what they have taken them to
be. They are not a product of the circumstances, but are instead 
an aspect of their own way of bein g. Second, he is urging the
participants not to attempt to avoid or transcend their moods,
however uncomfortable the y may seem, but rather to allow them,
and to bring them into The Forum so that they can be part of the 
process. As The Forum proceeds, these suggestions will be seen
as crucial to the development of the ontological dialogue. ■
--- Page 40 ---
26 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
from being an asshole, send me a fl yer, and I will decide if that’s the seminar that’ll handle my 
being an asshole.
BILL
You know I have to say something. The only value I’ve gotten so far is entertainment from your 
cynicism.
ERHARD
You remember when I said you would be sitting there with your judgments and assessments?
BILL
Believe me, I’m here with an open mind.
This interaction, which was in its early moments the most belligerent of the entire four days, grad-
ually became playful. Bill be gan to smile, and the dialogue assumed the character of good-natured
sparring.
ERHARD
Back to the issue of pressure. Did you 
get a lot of phone calls?
BILL
From one 
lady in particular. During the process I was tryin g to prospect her into something 
and in the end she prospected me into something.
(laughter)
ERHARD
I
’m not going to ask what you were prospecting her into. But at any rate there was a lady who
called you a number of times.
BILL
She
’s married, Werner.
ERHARD
It’s hard to have this conversation with you with your foot nailed to the fl oor. How many times
did she call?
BILL
I don’t know. A half dozen to a dozen times. Perha
ps more.
ERHARD
And what did you say to her when she called to talk about The Forum?
ERHARD (continuing)
--- Page 41 ---
 Forum Da y One: Session One 27
BILL
I appreciated her concern about my welfare.
ERHARD
Did you really, or were you bullshitting her?
BILL
No.
ERHARD
So you never told her 
“no,” right?
BILL
Never directly “no.”
ERHARD (turning to the group)
I’m revealing the nature of pressure. That’s what Bill and I are havin g this conversation
about. Nobody does The Forum because they were pressure d into it.
(Erhard placed his hands on Bill’s head and pushed down)
That’s what pressure is. But what had the people from the Center done? They called you. They 
spoke to you. What else did they do? They stayed engaged in the conversation with you because
you never said no.
BILL
They called me every day. 
ERHARD
Every day?
BILL
Well, maybe every other day.
ERHARD (to the group) 
You all have a story, and your story is as full of shit as Bill’s. And I’m using language that’s 
clear enough for everybody to understand.
(to Bill)
Bill, because you’ve been carrying this load for everyone, you can leave now whatever your 
reason.
--- Page 42 ---
28 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
ERHARD (pausing)
You’ve got a story called pressure. You’ve got a story and then there’s what happened.
BILL
I just want to say that I was disillusioned by the salesmanship involved in getting me into the
program...
ERHARD (interrupting)
What is this salesmanship?
BILL
Let me fi nish m
y sentence!
ERHARD
I’m not interested in your fi nishin
g your sentence when it’s bullshit.
BILL
Bullshit fl ows both wa
ys.
(laughter)
ERHARD
What is this salesmanship you’re talking about? You wouldn’t have been called any more if 
you’d said no. You said “Call me some more.”
(turning to the group)
If you think you were pressured, I want you to stop lyin g about it and tell the truth about what 
happened or get out of here. 
BILL 
Why don’t you look at me? These people aren’t interested in bein
g entertained by you on my 
eccentricities.
ERHARD
Bill, I’m more likel
y to know what they’re interested in than you. Are you able to make a choice 
about being here now that you’ve got a choice? 
BILL (stammering) 
Some of what you’ve done is off ensive to me. I might get something. I don’t know.
ERHARD
Would you make that choice for me?
--- Page 43 ---
 Forum Da y One: Session One 29
Hesitantly, Bill sat down.
ERHARD
Do I take that to mean that you’ve chosen to be here?
BILL
Yes. 
ERHARD (to the group)
All Bill’s doing is doing you a favor. He’s letting you see yourself. That’s an extraordinary gift, 
to see yourself.
(turning back to Bill)
I want to apologize to you for saying things that you found off ensive. Do you accept my 
apology?
BILL
Yes, I do. 
ERHARD 
I’m not clear you’re here because you chose to be here.
BILL 
Yes. But I’m not clear if I’ll get the results.
 ERHAR D
And you won’t be. How The Forum works is you learn nothing. And then you learn more noth-
ing. And then you learn it all at once. It’s an all of a sudden phenomenon. 
(pausing) 
What we just went through is very important. I brought something to that conversation that’s 
designed to leave you in a diff erent place about those conversations. I predict that when The
Forum is over you’ll tell me this was the most important experience in your whole life. We’ll
see. There’s a bit of a risk here, and I accept that.
Erhard fi nally left Bill, and addressed the group, moving among them.
ERHARD
Nobody participates in programs that I lead because they were pressured. A lot o f people are 
here because they’ve got reasons to be here. And I want you to know you’re not here because 
of your reasons. You put yourself in that chair, and not your reasons. You’ve got a story called
force, and what actually happened was somebody spoke to you. If you live in a story called 
force, your life will look like a response to force. See, most of you live in response to a story you 
made up. You live in a sea of reasons. But I want you to be clear, you put yourself in that chair,
“
 If you live in a story called force, your life
will look like a response to force.
   NOTE: Please see the final conversation Erhard has with Bill 
near the close of Session Three of Day Four.
--- Page 44 ---
30 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
not the reasons, nobody else and nothing else. And you have reasons. That ’s what I mean by 
people don’t know their ass from a hole in the ground. People don’t know what put them in that
chair. If you’re stuck with this idea that you were pressured, I want you out of here. I’m going 
to say a lot of things in here and you’re only going to get them almost. I know that today you’re
going to get almost nothing I say, because you’re going to put it in the language in which you
dwell. Like “should.” I don’t dwell in the language of should. It’s patently obvious here. I’m 
asking you who’s buried in Grant’s Tomb. This is not hard. You put yourself here.
A participant raised a question about a friend he wanted to do The Forum. He described the man.
PARTICIPANT
Would he feel pressured? 
ERHARD
Yeah, because he’s an asshole.
PARTICIPANT (laughs)
Yeah, that’s true.
ERHARD
You see, you can’t pressure people who are straight. They give clear answers, like “no,” or 
“don’t call me.” I invite people. I want to be clear what I mean by an invitation. An invitation
for me always carries with it the power to decline.
Erhard mounted the platform, and announced a break. However, he said, “in The Forum there are 
no breaks,” so he gave the participants an assignment.
ERHARD
The assignment during the break is to sort out your “story” from “what happened.” Most people 
live in the story and don’t live in the what happened. And there’s something disempowering 
about living in the story instead of livin g in the what happened. The problem is that you are 
thrown—that’ s like already always— you are thrown to the story. You are addicted to the story.
“People don’t like me” and “being insulted” never happen. I’m going to demonstrate insulting. 
I’m going to insult you: I insult you. For the fi  rst time in your life you’ve now been insulted as a
what happened. All the other times, someone said something, and you got insulted. People have t
said you’re a jerk. But that’s somebody saying “You’re a jerk.” The insult was a story.t
Having given the assignment, Erhard called Julie, The Forum Supervisor, to the podium. 
ERHARD
Julie’s the person who keeps this organized enough so that it can happen. So your cooperation 
with her is in your interest.
ERHARD (continuing)
--- Page 45 ---
 Forum Da y One: Session One 31
After Erhard left the room, Julie requested that due to the size of the group all participants should
be respectful of the hotel. She pointed out the assistants who could direct participants to pay phones
and bathrooms. “We request that you don’t eat on this break,” she said. “If you must eat for medical
reasons, please see Wes,” one of the two Forum leaders who were assisting Erhard. Finally she in-
troduced the other four Forum supervisors who were working with her, and who were available to
answer their questions. Finally, as she would before every break, she read the names of participants
who had received telephone messages during the session.
The Forum adjourned for a break at 12:40 pm.
--- Page 46 ---
32 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
Hints: Ontological Distinctions
The Forum achieves its result through the development in dialogue of what Werner 
Erhard calls distinctions. In traditional education, based in an epistemological model 
in which the goal is to increase or enhance what is known, information—concepts, 
ideas, processes—are communicated through definition and explanation. The Fo-
rum, however, develops an ontological model of education, in which the goal is not 
an increase in knowledge but an experience of Being. In this model, the elements of 
the course content are distinguished. 
The nature of distinctions will be addressed at length by Erhard later in The 
Forum. But here, early on the first morning, the development of distinctions is al-
ready under way. Erhard is beginning to employ an aspect of his methodology that, 
according to Martin Heidegger, is central to ontological communication: the use of 
hints to communicate what cannot directly be spoken, thereby providing access to 
the content as lived rather than as merely understood. 
Heidegger introduced the idea of hinting as a way of communicating Being in 
his 1959 essay, “A Dialogue on Language” (in OWL), which provides an account of 
his conversation with a Japanese scholar who shared his interest in ontological 
inquiry. The interaction, presented in the form of a transcript, occurs as a stately 
conversational dance, a linguistic minuet. Each move is made with great care, so the 
interaction proceeds at times with excruciating deliberateness. At one point Heide-
gger (referred to in the account as the Inquirer) poses a question—“Do you have in 
your language a word for what we call language?”—to which the scholar arrives at 
a tentative answer only after twenty-three pages of thoughtful circumnavigation in 
and around the topic. 
In response to a remark by the Japanese about language’s “essential being, ” 
Heidegger refers to his often-quoted characterization of language as “the house of 
Being. ” The phrase, he says, “gives a hint of the nature of language” (“DL” in OWL 
26). As the two men’s dialogue continues, the extraordinary attentiveness given 
to each word reveals a respect for the nature of hints. Hints, Heidegger observes, 
“belong to an entirely different realm of reality. . . . They are enigmatic. They beckon 
to us. They beckon away. They beckon us toward that from which they unexpectedly 
bear themselves toward us” (“DL” in OWL 26).
In his conversation with the Japanese scholar, Heidegger is distinguishing 
hinting, which is to say that he is hinting at the nature of hints. The Forum’s develop-
ment of distinctions is likewise a process of hinting. 
SESSION ONE INTERVAL
In hinting, words are spoken in such a way that “each word in each case is 
given its full—most often hidden—weight” (“DL” in OWL 31). What is not spoken, but 
communicated in the background, is allowed to reverberate. In this way a space is 
allowed to develop around each utterance:
[Inquirer]: Hints need the widest sphere in which to swing. . .
[Japanese]: . . . where mortals go to and fro only slowly.
[Inquirer]: This is what our language calls “hesitate. ” It is done 
truly when slowness rests on shy reverence. And so I do not wish to 
disturb your hesitation by urging you on too rashly.
[Japanese]: You are more helpful to me in my attempt to say the 
word than you can know. (“DL ” in OWL 27–28)
Further, although each distinction has a rubric for its topic—in this dialogue, the 
topic is the nature of language—in developing distinctions the aim is not to arrive at 
a correct verbal articulation of the rubric. On the contrary, the goal is to avoid such a 
resolution:
[Japanese]: We Japanese do not think it strange if a dialogue 
leaves undefined what is really intended, or even restores it 
back to the keeping of the undefinable.
[Inquirer]: That is part, I believe, of every dialogue that 
has turned out well between thinking beings. As if of its own 
accord, it can take care that that undefinable something not 
only does not slip away, but displays its gathering force ever 
more luminously in the course of the dialogue. (“DL ” in OWL 13)
In this conversation, Heidegger and the Japanese scholar may be seen as 
enacting the methodology of The Forum: the dialogic development of distinctions 
through a process of hinting. Being cannot be verbalized. Being is in language, but 
it is not in the words that are spoken. It lives in the unspoken background, and in 
a conversation for Being, that background must be made present. Hints are an 
appropriate form for bringing a background to presence because they direct our 
attention toward something we had not noticed, something which they at the same 
time bring forward to meet us. 
Ontological hinting is not an easy form of communication to master, and by 
characterizing it here as an element of The Forum’s “methodology, ” we have fallen 
prey to one of its pitfalls. When Heidegger says to the Japanese scholar that calling 
“
“
--- Page 47 ---
Forum Day One: Session One Interval 33
language “the house of Being” gives a “hint of the nature of language, ” the scholar 
immediately recognizes the danger: “I fear that to call your ‘house of Being’ a hint 
might tempt you and me to elaborate the notion of hinting into a guiding concept in 
which we then bundle up everything” (“DL” in OWL).  Heidegger concurs, but adds 
that this error can “never be prevented in the sense of being totally excluded, ” since 
“the mode of conceptual representation insinuates itself all too easily into every 
kind of human experience” (“DL” in OWL 25). 
A relevant observation by the senior author: during my years of participation in 
Erhard’s work, the distinguishing of distinctions has remained a source of fascina-
tion, challenge, and even mystery for me. I have observed conv ersations between 
Forum leaders—people for whom the development of distinctions is central to their 
professional practice—in which the speaking occurred to me as a kind of short-
hand. Elements of everyday interaction—details,  transitions, connections—seemed 
to be missing. On one occasion, a statement by one Forum leader elicited this re-
sponse from another: “You’re explaining it. Distinguish it. ” I found myself struggling 
to recognize the difference being referred to. 
An extensive hint at the nature of distinctions is found in Heidegger’s later work, 
where he turned his attention increasingly to the ontological possibilities of art, and 
specifically of poetry. Poetry, he said, is projective saying— that is, a kind of saying 
which projects a clearing for Being by speaking the unspoken. “Projective saying 
is saying which, in preparing the sayable, simultaneously brings the unsayable as 
such into a world” (“OWA” in PL T 71). But such saying is not limited to the speaking 
of the poet, because “Language itself is poetry in the essential sense” (“OWA” in PL T 
72). Indeed, “everyday language is a forgotten and used-up poem, from which there 
hardly resounds a call any longer” (“L” in PL T 205). 
The thinker, says Heidegger elsewhere, confines his thinking to a single 
thought
 (PL T 4). Heidegger’s single thought was the question of Being. A similar 
single-mindedness characterizes the poet, and so Heidegger’s description of the 
poet’s relation to the unsayable is useful:
Every great poet creates his poetry out of one single 
poetic statement only. . . . The poet’s statement remains 
unspoken. None of his individual poems, nor their totality, 
says it all. Nonetheless, every poem speaks from the whole 
of the one single statement, and in each instance says that 
statement. (“LP” in OWL 160)
“
Therefore all of Heidegger’s writing and all of Werner Erhard’s work, as well as all the 
poetry of Dickinson or Rilke or Wallace Stevens, may be seen as bodies of hints for 
the Saying of what is essentially unsayable.  
--- Page 48 ---
34 SPEAKING BEIN G
During the forty-minute break, statements had been written on two of the chalkboards. On one: 
“Promise of The Forum: You can have anything out of The Forum that you are willing to stand for 
having gotten.” On the second: “The commitment of the work is Transformation: bringing forth a 
breakthrough in the possibility of being for human beings.”
As The Forum resumed, Erhard began with a question.
ERHARD
What happened when you were considerin
g the diff erence between your story and what hap-
pened?
PARTICIPANT
I found that I didn’t want to confront my stories.
ERHARD
It’s possible to live in a kind of unconsciousness that we don’t ordinaril
y call unconsciousness
because we’re not knocked out. It’s an unconsciousness which appears asnot being there. What 
you can’t be with prevents you from being. If you mash up the what happens and the story, it
kind of keeps you a little unconscious, because you don’t have to be with it. But when you start
to distinguish the story from what happened, you be gin to see the story as a story, and it’s not 
very attractive that way, is it? And it’s something one would mostly avoid being with. There
will be a lot that will come up in here that you don’t want to be with. It’s useful to be with what
you don’t want to be with. What you’ve already learned to be with and survive with--that’s not 
going to be very useful in here, it’s the part you’ve avoided being with here. Anything else?
Thanks very much.
As participants responded to this question, Erhard contextualized their contributions by expanding
the distinctions he had introduced earlier in the day. 
JOHN
I’ve never really liked my wife’s version of the story of how we got married.
ERHARD
When you can reco
gnize a person’s story as their story, you begin to have access to their version 
of the story, so that you’re not stuck with, you don’t have to resign yourself to, their version of 
the story. You have access to diff erent possibilities within the story, but not when it’s mashed up 
with what happened.
JOHN
I got so upset, I left the room, and while I heard the story from another part of the house, my 
upset turned toward wanting to get out of my marriage.
ERHARD  (interrupting)
You didn’t invent thinking about getting out of your marriage. That’s already always in the cul-
ture of being for human beings. You think, “oh well, this happened and that made me think I 
F O RUM DA Y O NE:  
SESSION TWO
“ 
When you can recognize a person’s story as
their story, you begin to have access to their 
version of the story, so that you’re not stuck
with, you don’t have to resign yourself to,
their version of the stor y.
--- Page 49 ---
Forum Day One: Session Two 35
Philosophy as Rhetorical Evocation
We propose that The Forum is an instance of ontological 
rhetoric. We emphasize at the outset that this is not the everyday 
understanding of rhetoric as “mere rhetoric, ” that is, language that 
is superficial and disconnected from serious purposes. Rhetoric as 
we use the term is any use of language that is intended to produce 
a real-world result. Ontological rhetoric communicates in the 
unspoken realm of language to provide its listeners with access to 
the realm of Being. 
Recognition of the value and function of ontological 
rhetoric is found in the later writing of Henry W. Johnstone, 
Jr., founder of the journal, Philosophy and Rhetoric. Early in his 
career, Johnstone believed that the role of the philosophical 
rhetor was “to treat his audience as an object, ” and that his goal 
should quit or leave.” That’s not the way it works. It’s a rainstorm. Leavin
g, getting out of things,
quitting—owns your life. It’s true you have the conversation with yourself personally. But that’s 
like getting wet in a rainstorm.
(with emphasis)
I’m not thinking that. That is thinking me.
(pausing)
I’m startin g to talk like people don ’t talk, because I want access to what concern s me that
people don’t have. So you and I are startin g to invent a lan guage that gives us access to the
things that are interestin g, or important, that concern us in li fe. It’s not your thought. I want 
you to start to think that it thinks you. You have the thou ghts like you get wet in the rain-
storm. I’m just askin g you to be gin to think in a way you haven’t thought before. The kind o f 
person you are is given by that thinkin g, which isn’t your thoughts or your thinkin g.
JOHN
What I noticed was that each of us have diff erent stories about how we got together.
ERHARD
You can’t ask questions like “True?” about people’s stories. There’s no such thing as “true”
stories.” “True” and “story” don’t go together. A story’s a story. People get into trouble in life
because they start believing their stories. Even worse, you start believing someone else’s story—
makes you a spear-carrier in somebody else’s opera. This is not a good way to live.
JOHN
We did what we did and got married.
ERHARD
Who is not clear about choosin g to be married? The conversation about why you’re in The 
Forum could apply as well to you in your job, or your marria ge. Almost nobody thinks the y 
are anyplace because the y put themselves there. But everybody puts themselves there. Then
you get the story about why you’re there. There’s no power in the story... You live in a stor y 
about bein g married. I accuse you that you live in a story about bein g married, and the 
quality of bein g married reflects that it in part is generated by a story. I didn’t say you don’t
have a good marria ge. But it’s limited to a certain box, a certain space or quality, when it’s a 
story. What happened? You got married. Then there’s this whole story. And they’re distinct
from one another. The same thin g is true about everythin g in life. See, you and I have the 
kind of lives that people would have if the y lived out of a stor y. And mostl y the stor y is 
constituted mostl y by your reasons. But you got that job. That’s what happened.
JOHN
Normally I know that, but I wasn’t clear about that last ni
ght. It’s so easy to forget.
--- Page 50 ---
36 SPEAKIN G BEIN G
was “to manipulate his audience so as to secure agreement” 
(“Persuasion” 19). But a “turn” in Johnstone’s thinking led him 
to acknowledge by 1978 that “the distinction between finding 
the truth in philosophy and finding the proper rhetorical devices 
for propagating it cannot be maintained” (“Truth” 74). In other 
words, “truth” is always and already rhetorical, never severed 
from its communication, and thus finding the “truth” requires 
holding up a pretense that rhetoric is merely a convenient 
accessory that can be dispensed with.
 Johnstone’s new perspective of the philosophy–rhetoric 
relationship was based in the concept of evocation: “My present 
view is that a successful argument in philosophy is one that is 
intended to evoke, and does evoke, a response of a certain kind 
in the man to whom it is addressed” (“Truth” 75). Johnstone cited 
Heidegger as evidence for this view, and his description here of 
Heidegger’s language use is consistent with our understanding of 
both Heidegger’s and Erhard’s thinking:
ERHARD
That’s why we don’t give you anything to remember. You just have to be.
HANNAH
There’s a new babysitter watching the baby while I’m here and I got a note at the break to call
and I immediately felt terror because six months ago there was an accident that threatened his
life.
ERHARD
You understand that the terror is of no value to her? You sympathize with the terror. When you
leave here you’ll be a little more ruthless than you are now. You’ll be concerned for what em-
powers people, not for sympathizing with their weaknesses. No empowerment in terror.
HANNAH
I had lost closeness with him. It was more about clinging, and I saw that it was more about
terror.
ERHARD
Major issues like parenting or confronting death generate the most persistent stories. The things 
that are real close to us are hard not to be stupid about. It’s hard to be with that people do die.
And you are going to die. And that’s hard to be with. The more dramatic the soap opera is the
easier it is to get drawn into it and not be able to distinguish the story from what happened.
MAX
I’m here because I want my life to stop being an emergency, in my personal and professional 
life. I am an upset waiting to happen.
ERHARD
Some of you are an argument waiting to happen. You’re waiting for the occasion to act out the 
argument.
MAX
Turnin
g away from my story to what happened is like becoming an arbitrator. It helps me get 
away from my guilt.
ERHARD
If guilt were useful, I would say have a lot of it. Listen up here! This is another one of those 
things you want to get. Feeling guilty makes it all right that you did something. If you didn’t feel 
guilty you’d be a bad person. That’s not terrible to be a bad person. No, it’s all right to do some-
thing as long as you feel guilty about it. Guilt is the salve we put on something that we did so
that we don’t have to be responsible for it. But you don’t know what I’m talking about because
you don’t know the diff erence between guilt and responsibility at this point. Max?
If I am correct in arguing that Heidegger 
conceives philosophy as basically rhetorical, 
some revision in our conception of rhetoric 
is called for. . . its purpose is not to incite its 
hearer to action—even the action of adopting 
some specific belief. Instead, rhetoric totally 
reorients the hearer; if he listens to it he is in 
a position to abandon an inauthentic life in 
favor of an authentic one. (“Rhetoric” 68)
“
On this view, the truth of philosophy is intimately infused with 
its communicability: “discovery, communication, and rhetoric all 
collapse into a unitary philosophical act” (“Truth” 76). Further, 
communicability is manifested as evocation: “The only way to tell 
whether what I have is a truth or a falsehood, ” said Johnstone, “is 
to contemplate its evocative power. ” And rhetoric, he added, is “the 
art of evocation” (“Truth” 76).
Finally, Johnstone’s discussion of Heidegger raises a third issue 
which will be particularly relevant in our analysis of The Forum: that 
is the question of the appropriate rhetorical style for addressing an 
